It is costly and politically difficult to continue this conflict.
More of you have lost your homes and even more are watching your home values plummet.
Through this remarkable chapter in the history of the United States and Iraq, we have met our responsibility.
Our relations abroad were strained.
You can tell that I'm a lame duck because nobody's following instructions.
And today, as my call for a time frame to remove our troops from Iraq has been echoed by the Iraqi government and even the Bush Administration, even after we learned that Iraq has a $79 billion surplus while we're wallowing in deficits, John McCain stands alone in his stubborn refusal to end a misguided war.
Over the course of these 8 years, I've seen the hopeful faces of young graduates and our newest military officers.
But most of all, congratulations to the Class of 2016!
The pace of change is not subsiding; it is accelerating.
America, we cannot turn back.
But for those of us fortunate enough to have been a part of this work and to see it up close, let me tell you, it can energize and inspire.
When trust in our institutions is low, we should reduce the corrosive influence of money in our politics and insist on the principles of transparency and ethics in public service.
The uninsured rate has never, ever been lower.
You also survived the daily jockeying for buses, from Livingston to Busch, to Cook, to Douglass, and back again.
We can invest in early childhood education.
We see no—we seek no military bases there.
For native-born Americans, it means reminding ourselves that the stereotypes about immigrants today were said, almost word for word, about the Irish and Italians and Poles, who it was said were going to destroy the fundamental character of America.
That's how we passed programs like Social Security and Medicare that lifted millions of seniors out of poverty.
Because I know our work has not only helped so many Americans, it has inspired so many Americans, especially so many young people out there, to believe that you can make a difference, to hitch your wagon to something bigger than yourselves.
Our life expectancy has, as well.
You’ll meet them if you haven't already.
Only if our politics better reflects the decency of our people.
You are smart, and you are beautiful, but more importantly, you are kind, and you are thoughtful, and you are full of passion.
It is agonizing for America to lose our young men and women.
The fundamentals we use to measure economic strength are whether we are living up to that fundamental promise that has made this country great—a promise that is the only reason I am standing here tonight.
On education, we will expand exchange programs and increase scholarships like the one that brought my father to America.
A while back, you may have seen a United States senator trotted out a snowball during a floor speech in the middle of winter as “proof” that the world was not warming.
Not in my ability to bring about change, but in yours.
Americans are ready to join with citizens and governments, community organizations, religious leaders, and businesses in Muslim communities around the world to help our people pursue a better life.
We can't disguise hostility towards any religion behind the pretence of liberalism.
And we’re funding a Post-9/11 GI Bill that helps our veterans and their families pursue the dream of a college education.
Now, we can and should argue about the best approach to solve the problem.
If something needs fixing, then lace up your shoes and do some organizing.
That’s a message that Vice President Biden is delivering to the Iraqi people through his visit there today.
And that's why I leave this stage tonight even more optimistic about this country than when we started.
It wasn’t because the facts and the evidence showed they wouldn't work.
I've seen our scientists help a paralyzed man regain his sense of touch.
If you disagree with somebody, bring them in -- (applause) -- and ask them tough questions.
The second major source of tension that we need to discuss is the situation between Israelis, Palestinians, and the Arab world.
For 240 years, our Nation's call to citizenship has given work and purpose to each new generation.
This was my pledge to the American people as a candidate for this office.
Not with an economy to fix and cities to rebuild and farms to save.
And more importantly, our democracy wins.
Building walls won’t change that.
We’ve closed or transferred to the Iraqis hundreds of bases.
In his own Farewell Address, George Washington wrote that self-government is the underpinning of our safety, prosperity, and liberty, but "from different causes and from different quarters much pains will be taken .
I've got to—I've got to move.
And we got to hold our leaders and ourselves accountable to know what the heck they’re talking about.
Well it's time for them to own their failure.
And more often than not, your faith in America, and in Americans, will be confirmed.
America, our work will not be easy.
We’ve doubled the production of clean energy.
It determines who our Congress is.
Individual responsibility and mutual responsibility—that's the essence of America's promise.
Let me also address the issue of Iraq.
Over 7 years ago, the United States pursued Al Qaida and the Taliban with broad international support.
For peace to come, it is time for them, and all of us, to live up to our responsibilities.
Words alone cannot meet the needs of our people.
Part of that responsibility is making sure that we honor our commitments to those who have served our country with such valor.
We measure progress by how many people can find a job that pays the mortgage; whether you can put a little extra money away at the end of each month so you can someday watch your child receive her college diploma.
If John McCain wants to follow George Bush with more tough talk and bad strategy, that is his choice—but it is not the change we need.
When violent extremists operate in one stretch of mountains, people are endangered across an ocean.
All of us share this world for but a brief moment in time.
But we must also admit that programs alone can't replace parents; that government can't turn off the television and make a child do her homework; that fathers must take more responsibility for providing the love and guidance their children need.
None of these changes happened overnight.
And we will also expand partnerships with Muslim communities to promote child and maternal health.
Now, I don't believe that Senator McCain doesn't care what's going on in the lives of Americans.
Many more are simply skeptical that real change can occur.
For too long, we have put off tough decisions on everything from our manufacturing base to our energy policy to education reform.
And this cycle of suspicion and discord must end.
That's how we banned child labor.
Even as Iraq continues to suffer terrorist attacks, security incidents have been near the lowest on record since the war began.
In that time, he's said no to higher fuel-efficiency standards for cars, no to investments in renewable energy, no to renewable fuels.
And so we have to preserve this truth with "jealous anxiety;" that we should reject "the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from the rest or to enfeeble the sacred ties" that make us one.
So America will defend itself, respectful of the sovereignty of nations and the rule of law, and we will do so in partnership with Muslim communities, which are also threatened.
The reality of gun ownership may be different for hunters in rural Ohio than for those plagued by gang-violence in Cleveland, but don't tell me we can't uphold the Second Amendment while keeping AK-47s out of the hands of criminals.
And it is no coincidence that countries where women are well educated are far more likely to be prosperous.
Indeed, none of us should tolerate these extremists.
And we are here because we love this country too much to let the next four years look like the last eight.
I understand those who protest that some countries have weapons that others do not.
And all of us have more work to do.
Not just because you have been a great Vice President, but because in the bargain, I gained a brother.
We can close tax loopholes on hedge fund managers and take that money and give tax breaks to help families with child care or retirement.
They work hard and give back and keep going without complaint.
Among some Muslims, there's a disturbing tendency to measure one's own faith by the rejection of somebody else's faith.
Without these ingredients, elections alone do not make true democracy.
Isolating or disparaging Muslims, suggesting that they should be treated differently when it comes to entering this country -- (applause) -- that is not just a betrayal of our values -- (applause) -- that's not just a betrayal of who we are, it would alienate the very communities at home and abroad who are our most important partners in the fight against violent extremism.
There's so much fear, so much mistrust that has built up over the years.
Washington's been talking about our oil addiction for the last thirty years, and John McCain has been there for twenty-six of them.
Instead, they overlap and share common principles, principles of justice and progress, tolerance and the dignity of all human beings.
You have shown what history teaches us—that at defining moments like this one, the change we need doesn't come from Washington.
Their actions are irreconcilable with the rights of human beings, the progress of nations, and with Islam.
I have mourned with grieving families searching for answers, and found grace in a Charleston church.
Because of the extraordinary courage of our men and women in uniform, because of our intelligence officers and law enforcement and diplomats who support our troops, no foreign terrorist organization has successfully planned and executed an attack on our homeland these past 8 years.
We have to pay attention and listen.
People in every country should be free to choose and live their faith based upon the persuasion of the mind and the heart and the soul.
We’ve cut extreme poverty drastically.
And you wore the burden of years in the spotlight so easily.
But somehow, you have survived such death-defying acts.
Islamic culture has given us majestic arches and soaring spires, timeless poetry and cherished music, elegant calligraphy and places of peaceful contemplation.
That's why we welcome efforts like Saudi Arabian King Abdallah's interfaith dialog and Turkey's leadership in the Alliance of Civilizations.
But if the past two decades have taught us anything, it’s that the biggest challenges we face cannot be solved in isolation.
They have rejected sectarian war, and they have no interest in endless destruction.
We were born out of revolution against an empire.
It's why GIs gave their lives at Omaha Beach and Iwo Jima, Iraq and Afghanistan, and why men and women from Selma to Stonewall were prepared to give theirs as well.
U.S. troops pulled out of Iraq’s cities last summer, and Iraqi forces have moved into the lead with considerable skill and commitment to their fellow citizens.
This same story can be told by people from South Africa to South Asia, from Eastern Europe to Indonesia.
They didn’t happen because some charismatic leader got everybody suddenly to agree on everything.
Indeed, it suggests the opposite.
So don’t lose hope if sometimes you hit a roadblock.
Trade can bring new wealth and opportunities, but also huge disruptions and change in communities.
But it was not violence that won full and equal rights.
And a wall won't stop that.
And finally, just as America can never tolerate violence by extremists, we must never alter or forget our principles.
I know—[applause]—I know, and you can tell from this audience, that there is a healthy debate about this issue.
But if you were listening to today’s political debate, you might wonder where this strain of anti-intellectualism came from.
For part of what has been lost these past eight years can't just be measured by lost wages or bigger trade deficits.
Why else would he define middle-class as someone making under five million dollars a year?
When voting rates in America are some of the lowest among advanced democracies, we should be making it easier, not harder, to vote.
It's easier to start wars than to end them.
We have everything we need to meet those challenges.
On economic development, we will create a new corps of business volunteers to partner with counterparts in Muslim-majority countries.
It sounds like mine, anyway.
This is the hope of all humanity.
They shifted tactics to protect the Iraqi people, trained Iraqi Security Forces, and took out terrorist leaders.
Our common prosperity will be advanced by allowing all humanity, men and women, to reach their full potential.
And I'll invest 150 billion dollars over the next decade in affordable, renewable sources of energy—wind power and solar power and the next generation of biofuels; an investment that will lead to new industries and five million new jobs that pay well and can't ever be outsourced.
The rejection of facts, the rejection of reason and science -- that is the path to decline.
And next August, we will begin a transition to Afghan responsibility.
I'm emphasizing such investment within my own country.
If you don't, you'll be able to get the same kind of coverage that members of Congress give themselves.
If the scope of freedom and respect for the rule of law shrinks around the world, the likelihood of war within and between nations increases, and our own freedoms will eventually be threatened.
And when the first Muslim American was recently elected to Congress, he took the oath to defend our Constitution using the same Holy Koran that one of our Founding Fathers, Thomas Jefferson, kept in his personal library.
Rivals like Russia or China cannot match our influence around the world, unless we give up what we stand for and turn ourselves into just another big country that bullies smaller neighbors.
And we all owe you a deep debt of gratitude.
In the past, it used to be a top CEO made 20 or 30 times the income of the average worker.
Violent extremists have exploited these tensions in a small, but potent minority of Muslims.
I am asking you to hold fast to that faith written into our founding documents; that idea whispered by slaves and abolitionists; that spirit sung by immigrants and homesteaders and those who marched for justice; that creed reaffirmed by those who planted flags from foreign battlefields to the surface of the Moon; a creed at the core of every American whose story is not yet written: Yes, we can.
But, ironically, the flood of information hasn’t made us more discerning of the truth.
We will, however, relentlessly confront violent extremists who pose a grave threat to our security, because we reject the same thing that people of all faiths reject: the killing of innocent men, women, and children.
Yet no one can doubt President Bush’s support for our troops, or his love of country and commitment to our security.
And in the weeks ahead, I look forward to debating them with John McCain.
Terrorism and sectarian warfare threatened to tear Iraq apart.
We’re treating the signature wounds of today’s wars -- post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury -- while providing the health care and benefits that all of our veterans have earned.
to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth."
But for now, whether you are young or whether you're young at heart, I do have one final ask of you as your President, the same thing I asked when you took a chance on me 8 years ago.
You make a big election about small things.
The obligations that the parties have agreed to under the road map are clear.
So if we're going to be serious about race going forward, we need to uphold laws against discrimination: in hiring and in housing and in education and in the criminal justice system.
It's easier to blame others than to look inward.
Tomorrow I will visit Buchenwald, which was part of a network of camps where Jews were enslaved, tortured, shot, and gassed to death by the Third Reich.
So let's be vigilant, but not afraid.
The market will fix it.
We’ve removed nearly 100,000 U.S. troops from Iraq.
And when one of his chief advisors—the man who wrote his economic plan—was talking about the anxiety Americans are feeling, he said that we were just suffering from a "mental recession," and that we've become, and I quote, "a nation of whiners."
It was Islam, at places like Al-Azhar, that carried the light of learning through so many centuries, paving the way for Europe's renaissance and enlightenment.
But I will also go through the federal budget, line by line, eliminating programs that no longer work and making the ones we do need work better and cost less—because we cannot meet twenty-first century challenges with a twentieth century bureaucracy.
And when that government is in place, there should be no doubt:  The Iraqi people will have a strong partner in the United States.
Make them defend their positions.
Our Constitution is a remarkable, beautiful gift, but it's really just a piece of parchment.
There have been moments throughout our history that threatened that solidarity.
This country is more decent than one where a woman in Ohio, on the brink of retirement, finds herself one illness away from disaster after a lifetime of hard work.
We must use all elements of our power -- including our diplomacy, our economic strength, and the power of America’s example -- to secure our interests and stand by our allies.
Now, for some of you, this may sound like your college career.
Because I've lived it.
There was hail when I landed in Newark.
One of the perks of my job is honorary degrees.
The Arab-Israeli conflict should no longer be used to distract the people of Arab nations from other problems.
And I will not settle for an America where some kids don't have that chance.
And all of us are united in appreciation for our servicemen and women, and our hopes for Iraqis’ future.
Set aside life in the ‘50s, when women and people of color were systematically excluded from big chunks of American life.
The relationship between Islam and the West includes centuries of coexistence and cooperation, but also conflict and religious wars.
For centuries, black people in America suffered the lash of the whip as slaves and the humiliation of segregation.
We have what we need to do so.
You understand that in this election, the greatest risk we can take is to try the same old politics with the same old players and expect a different result.
Look, I know it’s not always pretty.
Twenty million more Americans know the financial security of health insurance.
Last year, incomes rose for all races, all age groups, for men and for women.
These are the Americans that I know.
But I do have a couple of suggestions that you may find useful as you go out there and conquer the world.
Today, you join a long line of Scarlet Knights whose energy and intellect have lifted this university to heights its founders could not have imagined.
Thousands of Americans gave their lives; tens of thousands have been wounded.
And finally, the Arab States must recognize that the Arab Peace Initiative was an important beginning, but not the end of their responsibilities.
We’re less dependent on foreign oil.
Islam is not part of the problem in combating violent extremism, it is an important part of promoting peace.
Don't lose hope in the face of naysayers.
But you are the first to launch a three-year campaign.
Tell that to the military families who shoulder their burdens silently as they watch their loved ones leave for their third or fourth or fifth tour of duty.
For while Senator McCain was turning his sights to Iraq just days after 9/11, I stood up and opposed this war, knowing that it would distract us from the real threats we face.
Iraq's sovereignty is its own.
I do not believe that women must make the same choices as men in order to be equal, and I respect those women who choose to live their lives in traditional roles.
But what the people heard instead—people of every creed and color, from every walk of life—is that in America, our destiny is inextricably linked.
In the Republicans who never thought they'd pick up a Democratic ballot, but did.
When Congress is dysfunctional, we should draw our congressional districts to encourage politicians to cater to common sense and not rigid extremes.
I've seen wounded warriors who at points were given up for dead walk again.
And these changes offer not only great opportunity, but also great peril.
So that faith that I placed all those years ago, not far from here, in the power of ordinary Americans to bring about change—that faith has been rewarded in ways I could not have possibly imagined.
We meet at a time of great tension between the United States and Muslims around the world, tension rooted in historical forces that go beyond any current policy debate.
It was a peaceful and determined insistence upon the ideals at the center of America's founding.
If you don't have a record to run on, then you paint your opponent as someone people should run from.
America respects the right of all peaceful and law-abiding voices to be heard around the world, even if we disagree with them.
But that potential will only be realized if our democracy works.
Health care costs are rising at the slowest rate in 50 years.
It has no power on its own.
A shrinking world, growing inequality; demographic change, and the specter of terrorism—these forces haven't just tested our security and our prosperity, but are testing our democracy as well.
Our government should work for us, not against us.
The top 10 percent of earners now take in half of all income in the U.S.
And today, in every phone in one of your pockets -- (laughter) -- we have access to more information than at any time in human history, at a touch of a button.
But there are no quick fixes to this long-term trend.
Countries like Japan and South Korea grew their economies enormously while maintaining distinct cultures.
Not just when there's an election, not just when your own narrow interest is at stake, but over the full span of a lifetime.
Because if you don't have any fresh ideas, then you use stale tactics to scare the voters.
And yet, we've become confused about this.
We're on live TV here.
And, yes, big money in politics is a huge problem.
So that's what we mean when we say America's exceptional: not that our Nation has been flawless from the start, but that we have shown the capacity to change and make life better for those who follow.
Today, America has a dual responsibility to help Iraq forge a better future and to leave Iraq to Iraqis.
But to simply deny the problem not only betrays future generations, it betrays the essential spirit of this country, the essential spirit of innovation and practical problem-solving that guided our Founders.
They have killed in many countries.
The times are too serious, the stakes are too high for this same partisan playbook.
It’s that simple.
You see, we Democrats have a very different measure of what constitutes progress in this country.
Blacks and Latinos have risen up the ranks in business and politics.
Progress doesn’t travel in a straight line.
I know a couple years ago, folks on this campus got upset that Condoleezza Rice was supposed to speak at a commencement.
It's what led patriots to choose republic over tyranny, pioneers to trek west, slaves to brave that makeshift railroad to freedom.
Take it with a grain of salt.
In Washington, they call this the Ownership Society, but what it really means is—you're on your own.
It's a story with a simple truth: Violence is a dead end.
He’d get a D.
The share of Americans with college educations have gone way up.
Now, I say all these things not to make you complacent.
Look at what Matthew is doing.
And I will host a summit on entrepreneurship this year to identify how we can deepen ties between business leaders, foundations, and social entrepreneurs in the United States and Muslim communities around the world.
Change happens because the American people demand it—because they rise up and insist on new ideas and new leadership, a new politics for a new time.
We measure the strength of our economy not by the number of billionaires we have or the profits of the Fortune 500, but by whether someone with a good idea can take a risk and start a new business, or whether the waitress who lives on tips can take a day off to look after a sick kid without losing her job—an economy that honors the dignity of work.
But make no mistake:  This transition will begin -- because open-ended war serves neither our interests nor the Afghan people’s.
We did not have spell-check back in my day.
In 2014, voter turnout was the lowest since World War II.
That's it, Class of 2016 -- (laughter) -- a few suggestions on how you can change the world.
You made the White House a place that belongs to everybody.
Of all that I've done in my life, I am most proud to be your dad.
Hold their feet to the fire.
And to accomplish those things, to make collective decisions on behalf of a common good, we have to use our heads.
They have affiliates in many countries and are trying to expand their reach.
But, as was the case in Iraq, we can’t do for Afghans what they must ultimately do for themselves.
As a young man, I worked in Chicago communities where many found dignity and peace in their Muslim faith.
When I listen to another worker tell me that his factory has shut down, I remember all those men and women on the South Side of Chicago who I stood by and fought for two decades ago after the local steel plant closed.
I know there are differences on same-sex marriage, but surely we can agree that our gay and lesbian brothers and sisters deserve to visit the person they love in the hospital and to live lives free of discrimination.
We weaken those ties when we define some of us as more American than others, when we write off the whole system as inevitably corrupt, and when we sit back and blame the leaders we elect without examining our own role in electing them.
And certainly don’t let resistance make you cynical.
The attacks of September 11, 2001, and the continued efforts of these extremists to engage in violence against civilians has led some in my country to view Islam as inevitably hostile not only to America and Western countries, but also to human rights.
In other words, it will determine our future.
As a student of history, I also know civilization's debt to Islam.
If John McCain wants to have a debate about who has the temperament, and judgment, to serve as the next Commander-in-Chief, that's a debate I'm ready to have.
And a lot of folks have legitimate concerns with the way globalization has progressed -- that's one of the changes that's been taking place -- jobs shipped overseas, trade deals that sometimes put workers and businesses at a disadvantage.
(Laughter and applause.)
For Blacks and other minority groups, that means tying our own very real struggles for justice to the challenges that a lot of people in this country face, not only the refugee or the immigrant or the rural poor or the transgender American, but also the middle-aged White guy who, from the outside, may seem like he's got advantages, but has seen his world upended by economic and cultural and technological change.
Progress in America has been hard and contentious, and sometimes bloody.
As Commander-in-Chief, I am incredibly proud of their service.
For over a thousand years, Al-Azhar has stood as a beacon of Islamic learning, and for over a century, Cairo University has been a source of Egypt's advancement.
And like all Americans, I’m awed by their sacrifice, and by the sacrifices of their families.
Once in power, they are ruthless in suppressing the rights of others.
“Our generation has so much energy to adapt and impact the world,” he said.
John McCain likes to say that he'll follow bin Laden to the Gates of Hell—but he won't even go to the cave where he lives.
It's not because I wasn’t proposing them.
We seized the future and made it our own.
It won't boost our economy, and it won’t enhance our security either.
Finally, I want to discuss economic development and opportunity.
It falls to each of us to be those anxious, jealous guardians of our democracy; to embrace the joyous task we've been given to continually try to improve this great Nation of ours.
As the Holy Koran tells us: "Be conscious of God and speak always the truth."
Because that, after all, is why we serve.
The President: I can't do that.
That’s what we’ve done.
The fifth issue that we must address together is religious freedom.
But all of us must recognize that education and innovation will be the currency of the 21st century, and in too many Muslim communities there remains underinvestment in these areas.
There were moments when, immediately after World War II, for example, or the end of the Cold War, when the world bent more easily to our will.
We are a better country than this.
Now, that effort must begin within our own borders.
We see it in the history of Andalusia and Cordoba during the Inquisition.
Our combat mission is ending, but our commitment to Iraq’s future is not.
It's the insistence that these rights, while self-evident, have never been self-executing; that we, the people, through the instrument of our democracy, can form a more perfect Union.
We would gladly bring every single one of our troops home, if we could be confident that there were not violent extremists in Afghanistan and now Pakistan determined to kill as many Americans as they possibly can.
Last February, I announced a plan that would bring our combat brigades out of Iraq, while redoubling our efforts to strengthen Iraq’s Security Forces and support its government and people.
Our universities and our culture are the envy of the world, but that's not what keeps the world coming to our shores.
THE PRESIDENT:  Well, that's nice.
Because you did change the world.
So don't tell me that Democrats won't defend this country.
That's what I want to focus on tonight: the state of our democracy.
The President: No, no, no, no, no, the peaceful transfer of power from one freely elected President to the next.
It is based upon cultural and historical ties and the recognition that the aspiration for a Jewish homeland is rooted in a tragic history that cannot be denied.
Although I believe that the Iraqi people are ultimately better off without the tyranny of Saddam Hussein, I also believe that events in Iraq have reminded America of the need to use diplomacy and build international consensus to resolve our problems whenever possible.
In all nations, including America, this change can bring fear.
Just as the GI Bill helped those who fought World War II -- including my grandfather -- become the backbone of our middle class, so today’s servicemen and women must have the chance to apply their gifts to expand the American economy.
You’ll look at things with fresher eyes, unencumbered by the biases and blind spots and inertia and general crankiness of your parents and grandparents and old heads like me.
America's strong bonds with Israel are well known.
It's the conviction that we are all created equal, endowed by our Creator with certain unalienable rights, among them life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
And engagement does not just mean deploying our military.
That's not challenging political correctness.
Now, it’s time to turn the page.
Now, I don't think it's a secret that I disagree with many of the foreign policies of Dr. Rice and the previous administration.
This completes a transition to Iraqi responsibility for their own security.
That spirit informed our inventors and our explorers, the Edisons and the Wright Brothers, and the George Washington Carvers and the Grace Hoppers, and the Norman Borlaugs and the Steve Jobses.
That's why we cannot withdraw from big global fights: to expand democracy and human rights and women's rights and LGBT rights.
We can raise the minimum wage.
This history is well known.
And in so many ways, the history of Rutgers mirrors the evolution of America -- the course by which we became bigger, stronger, and richer and more dynamic, and a more inclusive nation.
That’s how democracy works.
This last point is important, because there are some who advocate for democracy only when they're out of power.
Ours is a promise that says government cannot solve all our problems, but what it should do is that which we cannot do for ourselves—protect us from harm and provide every child a decent education; keep our water clean and our toys safe; invest in new schools and new roads and new science and technology.
We may not agree on abortion, but surely we can agree on reducing the number of unwanted pregnancies in this country.
And if you vote and you elect a majority that represents your views, you will get what you want.
So I'm here, off Exit 9, on the banks of the Old Raritan -- (applause) -- at the site of one of the original nine colonial colleges.
It was on these streets where I witnessed the power of faith and the quiet dignity of working people in the face of struggle and loss.
Indeed, we can recall the words of Thomas Jefferson, who said: "I hope that our wisdom will grow with our power and teach us that the less we use our power, the greater it will be."
Point number one:  When you hear someone longing for the “good old days,” take it with a grain of salt.
I've seen it in Washington, when we worked across party lines to open up government and hold lobbyists more accountable, to give better care for our veterans and keep nuclear weapons out of terrorist hands.
That is why there is a mosque in every State in our Union and over 1,200 mosques within our borders.
But the next wave of economic dislocations won't come from overseas.
When John McCain said we could just "muddle through" in Afghanistan, I argued for more resources and more troops to finish the fight against the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11, and made clear that we must take out Osama bin Laden and his lieutenants if we have them in our sights.
Only Iraqis can build a democracy within their borders.
That’s why we’re training Afghan Security Forces and supporting a political resolution to Afghanistan’s problems.
We all have to start with the premise that each of our fellow citizens loves this country just as much as we do; that they value hard work and family just like we do; that their children are just as curious and hopeful and worthy of love as our own.
I've come here to Cairo to seek a new beginning between the United States and Muslims around the world, one based on mutual interest and mutual respect and one based upon the truth that America and Islam are not exclusive and need not be in competition.
And that is why we will support them everywhere.
But if we choose to be bound by the past, we will never move forward.
When Washington doesn't work, all its promises seem empty.
I am grateful to finish this journey with one of the finest statesmen of our time, a man at ease with everyone from world leaders to the conductors on the Amtrak train he still takes home every night.
If you have health care, my plan will lower your premiums.
Too much blood has been shed.
Our troops are the steel in our ship of state.
Around the world, we can turn dialog into interfaith service, so bridges between peoples lead to action, whether it is combating malaria in Africa or providing relief after a natural disaster.
And Israel must also live up to its obligation to ensure that Palestinians can live and work and develop their society.
Let me congratulate my extraordinarily worthy fellow honorary Scarlet Knights, Dr. Burnell and Bill Moyers.
Now, many of these plans will cost money, which is why I've laid out how I'll pay for every dime—by closing corporate loopholes and tax havens that don't help America grow.
It’s well known that he and I disagreed about the war from its outset.
In politics and in life, ignorance is not a virtue.
The first nation to recognize my country was Morocco.
And if we did these things, then we’d help to restore the sense that hard work is rewarded and we could build an economy that truly works for everybody.
You'll soon outnumber all of us, and I believe as a result the future is in good hands.
The people of the world can live together in peace.
This new approach reflects our long-term partnership with Iraq -- one based upon mutual interest and mutual respect.
Our unity at home was tested.
In the face of that young student who sleeps just three hours before working the night shift, I think about my mom, who raised my sister and me on her own while she worked and earned her degree; who once turned to food stamps but was still able to send us to the best schools in the country with the help of student loans and scholarships.
Rather than remain trapped in the past, I've made it clear to Iran's leaders and people that my country is prepared to move forward.
Unfortunately, over the last decade, we’ve not done what’s necessary to shore up the foundations of our own prosperity.
They have killed people of different faiths, but more than any other, they have killed Muslims.
So you’ve got to be committed to participating not just if you get immediate gratification, but you got to be a citizen full-time, all the time.
And isn't that part of what so often makes politics dispiriting?
My fellow Americans, it has been the honor of my life to serve you.
But that is not yet the case.
We can see it happening right now.
As a friend of mine who happens to be from New Jersey, a guy named Bruce Springsteen, once sang -- (applause) -- “they spend their lives waiting for a moment that just don’t come.”  Don’t let that be you.
And a new generation sets its sights higher because it has you as a role model.
Look at somebody like Madison Little, who grew up dealing with some health issues, and started wondering what his care would have been like if he lived someplace else, and so, here at Rutgers, he took charge of a student nonprofit and worked with folks in Australia and Cambodia and Uganda to address the AIDS epidemic.
And the reason America is better is because we didn’t look backwards we didn’t fear the future.
This truth transcends nations and peoples, a belief that isn't new, that isn't black or white or brown, that isn't Christian or Muslim or Jew.
How can elected officials rage about deficits when we propose to spend money on preschool for kids, but not when we're cutting taxes for corporations?
And just as we keep our keep our promise to the next generation here at home, so must we keep America's promise abroad.
That's why we plan to invest $1.5 billion each year over the next 5 years to partner with Pakistanis to build schools and hospitals, roads and businesses, and hundreds of millions to help those who've been displaced.
And the good news is that today the economy is growing again.
But when our leaders express a disdain for facts, when they’re not held accountable for repeating falsehoods and just making stuff up, while actual experts are dismissed as elitists, then we’ve got a problem.
Now is the time to help families with paid sick days and better family leave, because nobody in America should have to choose between keeping their jobs and caring for a sick child or ailing parent.
There’s more democracy.
You’re more environmentally conscious.
(The wind starts blowing hard.)
But that's what we did.
This, in turn, has short-changed investments in our own people, and contributed to record deficits.
The Talmud tells us: "The whole of the Torah is for the purpose of promoting peace."
I just think he doesn't know.
We can make college more affordable.
But I worry if we think that the entire burden of our engagement with the world is up to the 1 percent who serve in our military, and the rest of us can just sit back and do nothing.
And that is why the United States will partner with any Muslim-majority country to support expanded literacy for girls and to help young women pursue employment through microfinancing that helps people live their dreams.
There’s not much I’m afraid to take on in my final year of office, but I know better than to get in the middle of that debate.
There's a second threat to our democracy, and this one is as old as our Nation itself.
I know it's getting cold and you guys have to graduate.
In this global economy, that’s not even possible.
It remains uneven and at times, for every two steps forward, it feels like we take one step back.
For over two decades, he's subscribed to that old, discredited Republican philosophy—give more and more to those with the most and hope that prosperity trickles down to everyone else.
It's because John McCain doesn't get it.
Passions fly on immigration, but I don't know anyone who benefits when a mother is separated from her infant child or an employer undercuts American wages by hiring illegal workers.
I'll make it easier for the American people to afford these new cars.
Tonight, I say to the American people, to Democrats and Republicans and Independents across this great land—enough!
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Because of you!
That's how we became America.
Building walls won't do that.
As with the surge in Iraq, these forces will be in place for a limited time to provide space for the Afghans to build their capacity and secure their own future.
You know who you are.
Now is the time for Palestinians to focus on what they can build.
There need not be contradictions between development and tradition.
until you climb into his skin and walk around in it."
It's not because John McCain doesn't care.
Make sure the next 250 years are better than the last.
That's just not knowing what you're talking about.
Yet in this new age, such attitudes are self-defeating.
Unlike John McCain, I will stop giving tax breaks to corporations that ship jobs overseas, and I will start giving them to companies that create good jobs right here in America.
Americans across the political spectrum supported the use of force against those who attacked us on 9/11.
The Internet and television can bring knowledge and information, but also offensive sexuality and mindless violence into the home.
Ending this war is not only in Iraq’s interest -- it’s in our own.
It ain’t so.
How do we excuse ethical lapses in our own party, but pounce when the other party does the same thing?
Audience members: Four more years!
You are willing to carry this hard work of democracy forward.
Yes, special interests and lobbyists have disproportionate access to the corridors of power.
And it's not just my belief.
Michelle—Michelle LaVaughn Robinson, girl of the South Side, for the past 25 years, you have not only been my wife and mother of my children, you have been my best friend.
A few years later, a handful of students gathered in a converted tavern for the first class.
And this is important, because no development strategy can be based only upon what comes out of the ground, nor can it be sustained while young people are out of work.
Each stage along the way required compromise.
But for all the real progress that we've made, we know it's not enough.
But we're not where we need to be.
ISIL will be destroyed, and no one who threatens America will ever be safe.
Here in New Brunswick, you can debate philosophy with a classmate from South Asia in one class, and then strike up a conversation on the EE Bus with a first-generation Latina student from Jersey City, before sitting down for your psych group project with a veteran who’s going to school on the Post-9/11 GI Bill.
When they wage peaceful protest, they're not demanding special treatment, but the equal treatment that our Founders promised.
And I hope your faith has, too.
Which brings me to my final point: Our democracy is threatened whenever we take it for granted.
It's time for us to change America.
We cannot impose peace.
I've seen the youngest of children remind us through their actions and through their generosity of our obligations to care for refugees or work for peace and, above all, to look out for each other.
Of course, the soldiers left much behind.
We have the most powerful military on Earth, but that's not what makes us strong.
So, Class of 2016, let me be as clear as I can be.
As a result, too many middle-class families find themselves working harder for less, while our nation’s long-term competitiveness is put at risk.
The unemployment rate is near a 10-year low.
And that is why I intend to personally pursue this outcome with all the patience and dedication that the task requires.
I mean, listen, climate change is not something subject to political spin.
You look at something like trade, for example.
And from that first class in a pub, Rutgers has evolved into one of the finest research institutions in America.
Presuming a reservoir of goodness in other people, that can be a risk, and there will be times when the process will disappoint you.
Each nation gives life to this principle in its own way, grounded in the traditions of its own people.
You’re more diverse.
These are the policies I will pursue.
We can modernize our infrastructure.
They defeated a regime that had terrorized its people.
But remember, none of this happens on its own.
Denying that fact is baseless, it is ignorant, and it is hateful.
Michelle and I are only here tonight because we were given a chance at an education.
We did not go by choice; we went because of necessity.
It actually happened over the course of years of advocacy, and organizing, and alliance-building, and deal-making, and the changing of public opinion.
You believe in a fair and just and inclusive America.
And that's what we have to restore.
That is what I will try to do today, to speak the truth as best I can, humbled by the task before us and firm in my belief that the interests we share as human beings are far more powerful than the forces that drive us apart.
When a new flu infects one human being, all are at risk.
The question is whether we spend that time focused on what pushes us apart, or whether we commit ourselves to an effort, a sustained effort to find common ground, to focus on the future we seek for our children, and to respect the dignity of all human beings.
Wages, incomes, home values, and retirement accounts are all rising again.
They understand that, in the end, only Iraqis can resolve their differences and police their streets.
And maybe you’ll learn something and realize you don't know everything.
He said that our economy has made "great progress" under this President.
And increasingly, we become so secure in our bubbles that we start accepting only information, whether it's true or not, that fits our opinions, instead of basing our opinions on the evidence that is out there.
I am honored to be in the timeless city of Cairo and to be hosted by two remarkable institutions.
They stared into the darkest of human creations -- war -- and helped the Iraqi people seek the light of peace.
Resistance through violence and killing is wrong, and it does not succeed.
In fact, faith should bring us together.
Look, as President, my first responsibility is always the security and prosperity of the United States.
We’ve persevered because of a belief we share with the Iraqi people -- a belief that out of the ashes of war, a new beginning could be born in this cradle of civilization.
And you know what—it's worked before.
And how we meet these challenges to our democracy will determine our ability to educate our kids and create good jobs and protect our homeland.
But those are sporadic, those moments, those episodes.
No single nation should pick and choose which nation holds nuclear weapons.
And I believe that America holds within her the truth that regardless of race, religion, or station in life, all of us share common aspirations to live in peace and security, to get an education and to work with dignity, to love our families, our communities, and our God.
But protecting our way of life, that's not just the job of our military.
In fact, over the last 19 months, nearly a dozen al Qaeda leaders -- and hundreds of al Qaeda’s extremist allies -- have been killed or captured around the world.
Of course, recognizing our common humanity is only the beginning of our task.
It's easy to point fingers, for Palestinians to point to the displacement brought about by Israel's founding and for Israelis to point to the constant hostility and attacks throughout its history from within its borders, as well as beyond.
Because part of ending a war responsibly is standing by those who have fought it.
I know there are those who dismiss such beliefs as happy talk.
And although Boston and Orlando and San Bernardino and Fort Hood remind us of how dangerous radicalization can be, our law enforcement agencies are more effective and vigilant than ever.
I will build new partnerships to defeat the threats of the 21st century: terrorism and nuclear proliferation; poverty and genocide; climate change and disease.
Nine-eleven was an enormous trauma to our country.
But without bolder action, our children won't have time to debate the existence of climate change.
Now let there be no doubt.
To the love of my life, our next First Lady, Michelle Obama, and to Sasha and Malia—I love you so much, and I'm so proud of all of you.
The United States has paid a huge price to put the future of Iraq in the hands of its people.
And that is, gear yourself for the long haul.
More of you have cars you can't afford to drive, credit card bills you can't afford to pay, and tuition that's beyond your reach.
Today, it’s 300 times more.
Make no mistake, we do not want to keep our troops in Afghanistan.
Go at them if they’re not making any sense.
We've got to reduce its influence.
But we should choose the right path, not just the easy path.
And it is that promise that forty five years ago today, brought Americans from every corner of this land to stand together on a Mall in Washington, before Lincoln's Memorial, and hear a young preacher from Georgia speak of his dream.
To President Clinton, who last night made the case for change as only he can make it; to Ted Kennedy, who embodies the spirit of service; and to the next Vice President of the United States, Joe Biden, I thank you.
And the bedrock of that prosperity must be a growing middle class.
That's the promise of America—the idea that we are responsible for ourselves, but that we also rise or fall as one nation; the fundamental belief that I am my brother's keeper; I am my sister's keeper.
But that same principle must apply to Muslim perceptions of America.
But the long sweep of America has been defined by forward motion, a constant widening of our founding creed to embrace all and not just some.
Tonight, I’d like to talk to you about the end of our combat mission in Iraq, the ongoing security challenges we face, and the need to rebuild our nation here at home.
You know that constant change has been America's hallmark; that it's not something to fear but something to embrace.
Senator McCain likes to talk about judgment, but really, what does it say about your judgment when you think George Bush has been right more than ninety percent of the time?
Likewise, it is important for Western countries to avoid impeding Muslim citizens from practicing religion as they see fit, for instance, by dictating what clothes a Muslim woman should wear.
But we have also understood that our nation’s strength and influence abroad must be firmly anchored in our prosperity at home.
Now, there is no straight line to realize this promise, but this much is clear: Governments that protect these rights are ultimately more stable, successful, and secure.
Because in an economy like this, the last thing we should do is raise taxes on the middle-class.
Since I graduated, crime rates, teenage pregnancy, the share of Americans living in poverty -- they’re all down.
The work of democracy has always been hard.
Even when times got tough and frustrating, you never let Washington get the better of you.
But I say it to point out that change has been a constant in our history.
But the failure to respond is a direct result of a broken politics in Washington and the failed policies of George W. Bush.
For many years, Iran has defined itself in part by its opposition to my country, and there is in fact a tumultuous history between us.
The victims were innocent men, women, and children from America and many other nations who had done nothing to harm anybody.
And sometimes in the midst of these storms, the future that we’re trying to build for our nation -- a future of lasting peace and long-term prosperity -- may seem beyond our reach.
Consistent with our agreement with the Iraqi government, all U.S. troops will leave by the end of next year.
Some are eager to stoke the flames of division and to stand in the way of progress.
You can't truly stand up for Georgia when you've strained our oldest alliances.
Let me tell you, you're not the only ones.
But if our democracy is to work, the way it should, in this increasingly diverse Nation, then each one of us need to try to heed the advice of a great character in American fiction, Atticus Finch, who said, "You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view .
And Iraqi forces have taken the fight to al Qaeda, removing much of its leadership in Iraqi-led operations.
Now, I've lived long enough to know that race relations are better than they were 10 or 20 or 30 years ago, no matter what some folks say.
“My peers give me a lot of hope that we’ll overcome the obstacles we face in society.”  That's you!
I know there has been controversy about the promotion of democracy in recent years, and much of this controversy is connected to the war in Iraq.
Hamas does have support among some Palestinians, but they also have to recognize they have responsibilities.
You’re not only better educated, you’ve been more exposed to the world, more exposed to other cultures.
This is a place where you 3D-print prosthetic hands for children, and devise rooftop wind arrays that can power entire office buildings with clean, renewable energy.
Whether we have seen eye to eye or rarely agreed at all, my conversations with you, the American people, in living rooms and in schools, at farms, on factory floors, at diners and on distant military outposts—those conversations are what have kept me honest and kept me inspired and kept me going.
You won’t always get everything you want -- at least not as fast as you want it.
It may not be perfect, it may not be great, but it's good.
How else could he propose hundreds of billions in tax breaks for big corporations and oil companies but not one penny of tax relief to more than one hundred million Americans?
But, contrary to what we hear sometimes from both the left as well as the right, the system isn’t as rigged as you think, and it certainly is not as hopeless as you think.
That is the world we seek, but we can only achieve it together.
Meanwhile, the struggle for women's equality continues in many aspects of American life and in countries around the world.
Unlike Afghanistan, Iraq was a war of choice that provoked strong differences in my country and around the world.
On the other hand, it is also undeniable that the Palestinian people, Muslims and Christians, have suffered in pursuit of a homeland.
Social attitudes oftentimes take generations to change.
And if you opt out, or stop paying attention, you won’t.
A new push for peace in the Middle East will begin here tomorrow.
That's why the United States Government has gone to court to protect the right of women and girls to wear the hijab and to punish those who would deny it.
The wealthy are paying a fairer share of taxes even as the stock market shatters records.
They have fought in our wars; they have served in our government; they have stood for civil rights; they have started businesses; they have taught at our universities; they've excelled in our sports arenas; they've won Nobel Prizes, built our tallest building, and lit the Olympic Torch.
Now Malia and Sasha just say, “Okay, Dr. Dad, we’ll see you later.
We assume whatever is on the web must be true.
You’ll figure it out.
So it’s up to you to insist upon and shape an informed debate.
When overseas states start falling apart, they become breeding grounds for terrorists and ideologies of nihilism and despair that ultimately can reach our shores.
So let there be no doubt, the situation for the Palestinian people is intolerable, and America will not turn our backs on the legitimate Palestinian aspiration for dignity, opportunity, and a state of their own.
For if we don't create opportunity for all people, the disaffection and division that has stalled our progress will only sharpen in years to come.
America is no fragile thing, but the gains of our long journey to freedom are not assured.
But what I will not do is suggest that the Senator takes his positions for political purposes.
They could've been told to succumb to the fear and frustration of so many dreams deferred.
[Laughter] Everybody have a seat.
But I will also renew the tough, direct diplomacy that can prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons and curb Russian aggression.
Tonight, more Americans are out of work and more are working harder for less.
Because I've seen it.
They sought to escape superstition, and sectarianism, and tribalism, and no-nothingness.
You and your fellow graduates are entering the job market with better prospects than any time since 2007.
Four years ago, I stood before you and told you my story—of the brief union between a young man from Kenya and a young woman from Kansas who weren't well-off or well-known, but shared a belief that in America, their son could achieve whatever he put his mind to.
THE PRESIDENT:  Can't do it.
And in exchange, I'll ask for higher standards and more accountability.
It determines what policies they prioritize.
And that's why I strongly reaffirmed America's commitment to seek a world in which no nations hold nuclear weapons.
Too many tears have been shed.
Now, partly, I’m confident because, on average, you’re smarter and better educated than my generation -- although we probably had better penmanship -- (laughter) -- and were certainly better spellers.
The wildest conspiracy theories are taken for gospel.
So long as our relationship is defined by our differences, we will empower those who sow hatred rather than peace, those who promote conflict rather than the cooperation that can help all of our people achieve justice and prosperity.
And now is the time to keep the promise of equal pay for an equal day's work, because I want my daughters to have exactly the same opportunities as your sons.
But politics is a battle of ideas.
This moment—this election—is our chance to keep, in the 21st century, the American promise alive.
Everybody, please have a seat.
Throughout our history, a new generation of Americans has reached up and bent the arc of history in the direction of more freedom, and more opportunity, and more justice.
That is why we will honor our agreement with Iraq's democratically elected Government to remove combat troops from Iraqi cities by July and to remove all of our troops from Iraq by 2012.
At the same time, Israelis must acknowledge that just as Israel's right to exist cannot be denied, neither can Palestine's.
And this trend represents a third threat to our democracy.
Together with Iraqis and coalition partners who made huge sacrifices of their own, our troops fought block by block to help Iraq seize the chance for a better future.
This construction violates previous agreements and undermines efforts to achieve peace.
That is the spirit we need today.
But privately, many Muslims recognize that Israel will not go away.
It was just a convoy of brave Americans, making their way home.
They'll be busy dealing with its effects: more environmental disasters, more economic disruptions, waves of climate refugees seeking sanctuary.
Some suggest that it isn't worth the effort, that we are fated to disagree and civilizations are doomed to clash.
The men and women who gathered there could've heard many things.
Today, old adversaries are at peace, and emerging democracies are potential partners.
And we have moved millions of pieces of equipment out of Iraq.
I'll help our auto companies re-tool, so that the fuel-efficient cars of the future are built right here in America.
It's easier to see what is different about someone than to find the things we share.
Understand, democracy does not require uniformity.
A war to disarm a state became a fight against an insurgency.
And I want to particularly say this to young people of every faith in every country: You, more than anyone, have the ability to reimagine the world, to remake this world.
Because one of the things that we have to change in our politics is the idea that people cannot disagree without challenging each other's character and patriotism.
Suggesting that we can build an endless wall along our borders, and blame our challenges on immigrants -- that doesn’t just run counter to our history as the world’s melting pot; it contradicts the evidence that our growth and our innovation and our dynamism has always been spurred by our ability to attract strivers from every corner of the globe.
The Americans who have served in Iraq completed every mission they were given.
Islam has a proud tradition of tolerance.
We are taking concrete actions to change course.
Look, our nation’s Founders -- Franklin, Madison, Hamilton, Jefferson -- they were born of the Enlightenment.
We are beneficiaries of the labor and the grit and the courage of generations who came before.
We will help Iraq train its security forces and develop its economy, but we will support a secure and united Iraq as a partner, and never as a patron.
The Palestinian Authority must develop its capacity to govern with institutions that serve the needs of its people.
It didn’t happen because some massive political revolution occurred.
For too many of us, it's become safer to retreat into our own bubbles, whether in our neighborhoods or on college campuses or places of worship or especially our social media feeds, surrounded by people who look like us and share the same political outlook and never challenge our assumptions.
But the answer isn’t to stop trading with other countries.
Politicians care about being elected, and they especially care about being reelected.
And next week, we'll also hear about those occasions when he's broken with his party as evidence that he can deliver the change that we need.
But laws alone won't be enough.
It's not cool to not know what you're talking about.
And as it turned out, America wasn't weakened by the presence of these newcomers; these newcomers embraced this Nation's creed, and this Nation was strengthened.
And when I hear a woman talk about the difficulties of starting her own business, I think about my grandmother, who worked her way up from the secretarial pool to middle-management, despite years of being passed over for promotions because she was a woman.
Because of our troops and civilians -- and because of the resilience of the Iraqi people -- Iraq has the opportunity to embrace a new destiny, even though many challenges remain.
Since the start of this new millennium, you’ve already witnessed horrific terrorist attacks, and war, and a Great Recession.
We can argue about how to best achieve these goals.
Well, guess what -- none of the great strides in our history happened right away.
Not with so many children to educate, and so many veterans to care for.
The dream of opportunity for all people has not come true for everyone in America, but its promise exists for all who come to our shores, and that includes nearly 7 million American Muslims in our country today, who, by the way, enjoy incomes and educational levels that are higher than the American average.
And the rise of naked partisanship and increasing economic and regional stratification, the splintering of our media into a channel for every taste—all this makes this great sorting seem natural, even inevitable.
We'll open centers of scientific excellence in Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia and appoint new science envoys to collaborate on programs that develop new sources of energy, create green jobs, digitize records, clean water, grow new crops.
And to all who serve or have served, it has been the honor of my lifetime to be your Commander in Chief.
It's what powered workers to organize.
We cannot walk alone.
The President: Now, this is where I learned that change only happens when ordinary people get involved and they get engaged and they come together to demand it.
We have to agree that facts and evidence matter.
In 10 days, the world will witness a hallmark of our democracy.
Not with so many families to protect and so many lives to mend.
The answer is to do trade the right way, by negotiating with other countries so that they raise their labor standards and their environmental standards; and we make sure they don’t impose unfair tariffs on American goods or steal American intellectual property.
And may God bless the United States of America, and all who serve her.
It's been about you.
Moreover, freedom in America is indivisible from the freedom to practice one's religion.
It was because a huge chunk of Americans, especially young people, do not vote.
That is what our Constitution and our highest ideals require.
We traditionally have valued those things.
New markets for our goods stretch from Asia to the Americas.
Since the Islamic Revolution, Iran has played a role in acts of hostage-taking and violence against U.S. troops and civilians.
We have created you male and a female, and we have made you into nations and tribes so that you may know one another."
So regardless of the station that we occupy, we all have to try harder.
You took on a role you didn't ask for and you made it your own, with grace and with grit and with style and good humor.
We are the party of Roosevelt.
The point is, to help ourselves we’ve got to help others -- (applause) -- not pull up the drawbridge and try to keep the world out.
As one staff sergeant said, “I know that to my brothers in arms who fought and died, this day would probably mean a lot.”       Those Americans gave their lives for the values that have lived in the hearts of our people for over two centuries.
The pace of our troop reductions will be determined by conditions on the ground, and our support for Afghanistan will endure.
Now, if we want to reverse those trends, there are a bunch of policies that would make a real difference.
And if participation means voting, and it means compromise, and organizing and advocacy, it also means listening to those who don’t agree with you.
Now, it’s our turn.
And I've seen it in this campaign.
Thank you, God Bless you, and God Bless the United States of America.
That’s why we’ve already made one of the largest increases in funding for veterans in decades.
But the notion that this community or the country would be better served by not hearing from a former Secretary of State, or shutting out what she had to say -- I believe that’s misguided.
That's how progress happens -- in societies and in our own lives.
They’re earning more money -- although it’s long past time that we passed laws to make sure that women are getting the same pay for the same work as men.
That commitment is at the core of the treaty, and it must be kept for all who fully abide by it.
But the record's clear: John McCain has voted with George Bush ninety percent of the time.
Fortunately, your generation has everything it takes to lead this country toward a brighter future.
If you doubt you can make a difference, look at the impact some of your fellow graduates are already making.
Our most urgent task is to restore our economy, and put the millions of Americans who have lost their jobs back to work.
I always tell my daughters, you know, better is good.
The Holy Bible tells us: "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called sons of God."
We are more compassionate than a government that lets veterans sleep on our streets and families slide into poverty; that sits on its hands while a major American city drowns before our eyes.
May God continue to bless the United States of America.
The truth is, on issue after issue that would make a difference in your lives—on health care and education and the economy—Senator McCain has been anything but independent.
And ultimately, that's how we help raise wages here in America.
They have met every test that they faced.
We all put our country first.
We must face these tensions squarely.
I don't fit the typical pedigree, and I haven't spent my career in the halls of Washington.
Whatever path you choose -- business, nonprofits, government, education, health care, the arts -- whatever it is, you're going to have some setbacks.
America, now is not the time for small plans.
We are the party of Kennedy.
Now, it's true that a lot of schools invite me to their commencement every year.
We search for sites that just reinforce our own predispositions.
And it is my first duty as President to protect the American people.
And to all of you out there—every organizer who moved to an unfamiliar town, every kind family who welcomed them in, every volunteer who knocked on doors, every young person who cast a ballot for the first time, every American who lived and breathed the hard work of change—you are the best supporters and organizers anybody could ever hope for, and I will be forever grateful.
To Chairman Dean and my great friend Dick Durbin; and to all my fellow citizens of this great nation; With profound gratitude and great humility, I accept your nomination for the presidency of the United States.
It even, for example, determines whether a really highly qualified Supreme Court nominee receives the courtesy of a hearing and a vote in the United States Senate.
Except maybe I've got one last suggestion.
All of us have a responsibility to work for the day when the mothers of Israelis and Palestinians can see their children grow up without fear, when the Holy Land of the three great faiths is the place of peace that God intended it to be, when Jerusalem is a secure and lasting home for Jews and Christians and Muslims and a place for all of the children of Abraham to mingle peacefully together as in the story of Isra, when Moses, Jesus, and Muhammed, peace be upon them, joined in prayer.
You have a healthy skepticism for conventional wisdom.
This afternoon, I spoke to former President George W. Bush.
And wages aren’t rising fast enough for millions of hardworking families.
And we love you and Jill like family, and your friendship has been one of the great joys of our lives.
And I was still trying to figure out who I was, still searching for a purpose in my life.
As we speak, al Qaeda continues to plot against us, and its leadership remains anchored in the border regions of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Now, it’s our responsibility to honor them by coming together, all of us, and working to secure the dream that so many generations have fought for -- the dream that a better life awaits anyone who is willing to work for it and reach for it.
That’s how we make sure that international rules are consistent with our values -- including human rights.
Tell that to the proud auto workers at a Michigan plant who, after they found out it was closing, kept showing up every day and working as hard as ever, because they knew there were people who counted on the brakes that they made.
We measure progress in the 23 million new jobs that were created when Bill Clinton was President—when the average American family saw its income go up $7,500 instead of down $2,000 like it has under George Bush.
For eighteen long months, you have stood up, one by one, and said enough to the politics of the past.
A caretaker administration is in place as Iraqis form a government based on the results of that election.
Now, that does not mean we should ignore sources of tension.
That's what built this country.
"We cannot walk alone," the preacher cried.
And that's why I ordered the removal of our combat brigades by next August.
So whatever we think of the past, we must not be prisoners to it.
The fear and anger that it provoked was understandable, but in some cases, it led us to act contrary to our traditions and our ideals.
Let me tell you, this generation coming up—unselfish, altruistic, creative, patriotic—I've seen you in every corner of the country.
I suspect that a few of you are trying to survive this afternoon, after a late night at Olde Queens.
So no matter where it takes hold, government of the people and by the people sets a single standard for all who would hold power.
Instead, it is that American spirit—that American promise—that pushes us forward even when the path is uncertain; that binds us together in spite of our differences; that makes us fix our eye not on what is seen, but what is unseen, that better place around the bend.
And it is on their behalf that I intend to win this election and keep our promise alive as President of the United States.
Now, the reason some of these things have not happened, even though the majority of people approve of them, is really simple.
Now, understand, I am sure you’ve learned during your years of college -- and if not, you will learn soon -- that there are a whole lot of folks who are book smart and have no common sense.
Within Afghanistan, I’ve ordered the deployment of additional troops who -- under the command of General David Petraeus -- are fighting to break the Taliban’s momentum.
And I have to say that really sealed the deal.
So I've got news for you, John McCain.
And success, however small, however incomplete, success is still success.
I only have two more points.
Don’t waste your time waiting.
And he’s a senator!
AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Four more years!
It should also serve as a message to the world that the United States of America intends to sustain and strengthen our leadership in this young century.
And, Class of 2016, you are graduating at such an inflection point.
For we have learned from recent experience that when a financial system weakens in one country, prosperity is hurt everywhere.
I’m fond of quoting Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., who said, “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.”  (Applause.)
That is what it means to share this world in the 21st century.
And that's why we're partnering with a coalition of 46 countries.
Emails, letters, tweets, YouTube videos.
The sooner the extremists are isolated and unwelcome in Muslim communities, the sooner we will all be safer.
So let there be no doubt, Islam is a part of America.
The Bush-McCain foreign policy has squandered the legacy that generations of Americans—Democrats and Republicans—have built, and we are here to restore that legacy.
They represent the fear of change; the fear of people who look or speak or pray differently; a contempt for the rule of law that holds leaders accountable; an intolerance of dissent and free thought; a belief that the sword or the gun or the bomb or the propaganda machine is the ultimate arbiter of what's true and what's right.
As a boy, I spent several years in Indonesia and heard the call of the azaan at the break of dawn and at the fall of dusk.
But without some common baseline of facts, without a willingness to admit new information and concede that your opponent might be making a fair point, and that science and reason matter, then we're going to keep talking past each other, and we'll make common ground and compromise impossible.
You can see it not just in statistics, you see it in the attitudes of young Americans across the political spectrum.
God bless this country we love.
All of this depends on our participation; on each of us accepting the responsibility of citizenship, regardless of which way the pendulum of power happens to be swinging.
It's a faith in other people, and it's what brought me here today.
And I consider it part of my responsibility as President of the United States to fight against negative stereotypes of Islam wherever they appear.
We have sent our young men and women to make enormous sacrifices in Iraq, and spent vast resources abroad at a time of tight budgets at home.
To Joe Biden, the scrappy kid from Scranton who became Delaware's favorite son, you were the first decision I made as a nominee, and it was the best.
One of the newest members of the Big Ten.
We must always examine the ways in which we protect it.
The sixth issue that I want to address is women's rights.
This tolerance is essential for religion to thrive, but it's being challenged in many different ways.
Malia and Sasha, under the strangest of circumstances, you have become two amazing young women.
I mean, I helped, but -- (applause.)
It will come from the relentless pace of automation that makes a lot of good, middle class jobs obsolete.
Most painfully, since the war began, 55 members of the Fourth Stryker Brigade made the ultimate sacrifice -- part of over 4,400 Americans who have given their lives in Iraq.
Just as it devastates Palestinian families, the continuing humanitarian crisis in Gaza does not serve Israel's security, neither does the continuing lack of opportunity in the West Bank.
There must be a sustained effort to listen to each other, to learn from each other, to respect one another, and to seek common ground.
Along with nearly 1.5 million Americans who have served in Iraq, they fought in a faraway place for people they never knew.
Not to score points or take credit, but to make people's lives better.
To the Board of Governors; to Chairman Brown; to Lieutenant Governor Guadagno; Mayor Cahill; Mayor Wahler, members of Congress, Rutgers administrators, faculty, staff, friends, and family -- thank you for the honor of joining you for the 250th anniversary of this remarkable institution.
America does not presume to know what is best for everyone, just as we would not presume to pick the outcome of a peaceful election.
I’m sure Michelle would approve.
These are not just American ideas, they are human rights.
Moreover, the sweeping change brought by modernity and globalization led many Muslims to view the West as hostile to the traditions of Islam.
It's a promise that says each of us has the freedom to make of our own lives what we will, but that we also have the obligation to treat each other with dignity and respect.
Qualities like kindness and compassion, honesty, hard work -- they often matter more than technical skills or know-how.
It won't change overnight.
That's the promise we need to keep.
I know there's been a lot of publicity about this speech, but no single speech can eradicate years of mistrust.
But America’s progress has never been smooth or steady.
Either way, you win.
The question now is not what Iran is against, but rather what future it wants to build.
That promise is our greatest inheritance.
But I do have an unyielding belief that all people yearn for certain things: the ability to speak your mind and have a say in how you are governed, confidence in the rule of law and the equal administration of justice, government that is transparent and doesn't steal from the people, the freedom to live as you choose.
I'll give you an example on a lot of people’s minds right now -- and that’s the growing inequality in our economy.
But let us be clear: Al Qaida killed nearly 3,000 people on that day.
I realize that I am not the likeliest candidate for this office.
Audience members: Four more years!
Imagine if Benjamin Franklin had seen that senator with the snowball, what he would think.
Because, as my mom used to tell me, reality has a way of catching up with you.
Over seven years before, American troops and coalition partners had fought their way across similar highways, but this time no shots were fired.
Pull yourself up by your own bootstraps—even if you don't have boots.
But I guess it's part of human nature, especially in times of change and uncertainty, to want to look backwards and long for some imaginary past when everything worked, and the economy hummed, and all politicians were wise, and every kid was well-mannered, and America pretty much did whatever it wanted around the world.
We live in a great nation and we are rightly proud of our history.
And as citizens, we all rightly put our country first.
Threatening Israel with destruction or repeating vile stereotypes about Jews is deeply wrong and only serves to evoke in the minds of Israelis this most painful of memories while preventing the peace that the people of this region deserve.
Since I graduated, in 1983 -- which isn't that long ago -- (laughter) -- I'm just saying.
Use your logic and reason and words.
Don't be scared to take somebody on.
But tonight, tonight it's my turn to say thanks.
But I also believe that the arc of our nation, the arc of the world does not bend towards justice, or freedom, or equality, or prosperity on its own.
If somebody has got a bad or offensive idea, prove it wrong.
In an age without surrender ceremonies, we must earn victory through the success of our partners and the strength of our own nation.
And so at this moment, as we wind down the war in Iraq, we must tackle those challenges at home with as much energy, and grit, and sense of common purpose as our men and women in uniform who have served abroad.
In ancient times and in our times, Muslim communities have been at the forefront of innovation and education.
These challenges are not all of government's making.
This issue has been a source of tension between the United States and the Islamic Republic of Iran.
They believed in rational thought and experimentation, and the capacity of informed citizens to master our own fates.
Look, if you want to change this country for the better, you better start participating.
In some ways, it’s just made us more confident in our ignorance.
It's the beating heart of our American idea, our bold experiment in self-government.
After all, we remain the wealthiest, most powerful, and most respected nation on Earth.
That's what you did.
Because it feeds into the cynicism we all have about government.
If your hopes have been dashed again and again, then it's best to stop hoping, and settle for what you already know.
And we will match promising Muslim students with internships in America, invest in online learning for teachers and children around the world, and create a new online network so a young person in Kansas can communicate instantly with a young person in Cairo.
For instance, in the United States, rules on charitable giving have made it harder for Muslims to fulfill their religious obligation.
Because in the faces of those young veterans who come back from Iraq and Afghanistan, I see my grandfather, who signed up after Pearl Harbor, marched in Patton's Army, and was rewarded by a grateful nation with the chance to go to college on the GI Bill.
I love this country, and so do you, and so does John McCain.
Today I'm announcing a new global effort with the Organization of the Islamic Conference to eradicate polio.
And for the sake of our economy, our security, and the future of our planet, I will set a clear goal as President: in ten years, we will finally end our dependence on oil from the Middle East.
How else could he offer a health care plan that would actually tax people's benefits, or an education plan that would do nothing to help families pay for college, or a plan that would privatize Social Security and gamble your retirement?
Now is the time to finally keep the promise of affordable, accessible health care for every single American.
Two weeks ago, America’s final combat brigade in Iraq -- the Army’s Fourth Stryker Brigade -- journeyed home in the pre-dawn darkness.
Imagine if your 5th grade science teacher had seen that.
I’m confident that you can make the right choices -- away from fear and division and paralysis, and toward cooperation and innovation and hope.
So I first came to Chicago when I was in my early twenties.
Only if all of us, regardless of party affiliation or particular interests, help restore the sense of common purpose that we so badly need right now.
You answered people's hopes, and because of you, by almost every measure, America is a better, stronger place than it was when we started.
After my election, there was talk of a postracial America.
All of us, regardless of party, should be throwing ourselves into the task of rebuilding our democratic institutions.
So let me be clear: No system of government can or should be imposed by one nation by any other.
But because of dreamers and innovators and strivers and activists, progress has been this nation’s hallmark.
We’ve got a bunch of big problems to solve.
We know that is God's vision, now that must be our work here on Earth.
We meet at one of those defining moments—a moment when our nation is at war, our economy is in turmoil, and the American promise has been threatened once more.
In Ankara, I made clear that America is not, and never will be, at war with Islam.
I believe that's misguided.
Extremists will continue to set off bombs, attack Iraqi civilians and try to spark sectarian strife.
And so we're going to have to forge a new social compact to guarantee all our kids the education they need, to give workers the power to unionize for better wages, to update the social safety net to reflect the way we live now, and make more reforms to the Tax Code so corporations and individuals who reap the most from this new economy don't avoid their obligations to the country that's made their very success possible.
Marriage equality is the law of the land.
And I have made it clear to the Iraqi people that we pursue no bases and no claim on their territory or resources.
The greatness of our democracy is grounded in our ability to move beyond our differences, and to learn from our experience as we confront the many challenges ahead.
Why would we want to stop it now?
Much has changed since that night.
Instead, it must be a cause for action to help the Palestinian people develop the institutions that will sustain their state, to recognize Israel's legitimacy, and to choose progress over a self-defeating focus on the past.
I know this historic moment comes at a time of great uncertainty for many Americans.
It's a belief that pulsed in the cradle of civilization and that still beats in the hearts of billions around the world.
I'll invest in early childhood education.
In fact, I will be right there with you, as a citizen, for all my remaining days.
And any nation, including Iran, should have the right to access peaceful nuclear power, if it complies with its responsibilities under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
They could've heard words of anger and discord.
And I'm hopeful that all countries in the region can share in this goal.
I have unequivocally prohibited the use of torture by the United States, and I have ordered the prison at Guantanamo Bay closed by early next year.
What has also been lost is our sense of common purpose—our sense of higher purpose.
At this moment, in this election, we must pledge once more to march into the future.
Because for two hundred and thirty two years, at each moment when that promise was in jeopardy, ordinary men and women—students and soldiers, farmers and teachers, nurses and janitors—found the courage to keep it alive.
And just as America is better, the world is better than when I graduated.
And so in that spirit, let me speak as clearly and as plainly as I can about some specific issues that I believe we must finally confront together.
I will rebuild our military to meet future conflicts.
And that's why we're forging service projects in America to bring together Christians, Muslims, and Jews.
If I had told you 8 years ago that America would reverse a great recession, reboot our auto industry, and unleash the longest stretch of job creation in our history; if I had told you that we would open up a new chapter with the Cuban people, shut down Iran's nuclear weapons program without firing a shot, take out the mastermind of 9/11; if I had told you that we would win marriage equality and secure the right to health insurance for another 20 million of our fellow citizens—if I had told you all that, you might have said our sights were set a little too high.
The situation in Afghanistan demonstrates America's goals and our need to work together.
Here, too, it’s time to turn the page.
I'm a Christian, but my father came from a Kenyan family that includes generations of Muslims.
So, just as we, as citizens, must remain vigilant against external aggression, we must guard against a weakening of the values that make us who we are.
That's the economic argument.
And I will restore our moral standing, so that America is once again that last, best hope for all who are called to the cause of freedom, who long for lives of peace, and who yearn for a better future.
Let me express my thanks to the historic slate of candidates who accompanied me on this journey, and especially the one who traveled the farthest—a champion for working Americans and an inspiration to my daughters and to yours—Hillary Rodham Clinton.
It's what pulled immigrants and refugees across oceans and the Rio Grande.
I don't think that's how democracy works best, when we're not even willing to listen to each other.
Suppressing ideas never succeeds in making them go away.
That order is now being challenged, first by violent fanatics who claim to speak for Islam, more recently by autocrats in foreign capitals who see free markets and open democracies and civil society itself as a threat to their power.
If we get on a plane, we say we really want a pilot to be able to pilot the plane.
And every day, I have learned from you.
We live in an age of global supply chains, and cargo ships that crisscross oceans, and online commerce that can render borders obsolete.
Now, much has been made of the fact that an African American with the name Barack Hussein Obama could be elected President.
Every day, tens of thousands of students come here, to this intellectual melting pot, where ideas and cultures flow together among what might just be America’s most diverse student body.
If you're disappointed by your elected officials, grab a clipboard, get some signatures, and run for office yourself.
That's why I stand here tonight.
The challenges we face require tough choices, and Democrats as well as Republicans will need to cast off the worn-out ideas and politics of the past.
Operation Iraqi Freedom is over, and the Iraqi people now have lead responsibility for the security of their country.
You must maintain your power through consent, not coercion; you must respect the rights of minorities and participate with a spirit of tolerance and compromise; you must place the interests of your people and the legitimate workings of the political process above your party.
We've cut infant mortality by an enormous amount.
She poured everything she had into me.
And we have shown that our economy doesn't have to be a zero-sum game.
It's a promise I make to my daughters when I tuck them in at night, and a promise that you make to yours—a promise that has led immigrants to cross oceans and pioneers to travel west; a promise that led workers to picket lines, and women to reach for the ballot.
You made me a better President, and you made me a better man.
And by the way, I'm not -- set aside 150 years ago, pre-Civil War -- there’s a whole bunch of stuff there we could talk about.
They expected us to do the same.
Going forward, a transitional force of U.S. troops will remain in Iraq with a different mission:  advising and assisting Iraq’s Security Forces, supporting Iraqi troops in targeted counterterrorism missions, and protecting our civilians.
But they knew that democracy does require a basic sense of solidarity: the idea that for all our outward differences, we're all in this together; that we rise or fall as one.
I believe that as hard as it will be, the change we need is coming.
And while America in the past has focused on oil and gas when it comes to this part of the world, we now seek a broader engagement.
The “good old days” weren’t that great.
But it should be their choice.
Two hundred and fifty years ago, when America was still just an idea, a charter from the Royal Governor -- Ben Franklin’s son -- established Queen’s College.
But my personal story is not so unique.
Which brings me to my third point:  Facts, evidence, reason, logic, an understanding of science -- these are good things.
Yet there has been one constant amidst these shifting tides.
It happened because ordinary Americans who cared participated in the political process.
We’ve now been through nearly a decade of war.
But I have to tell you, it impresses nobody in my house.
Meanwhile, in the eight years since most of you started high school, we’re also better off.
Because for all our outward differences, we, in fact, all share the same proud title, the most important office in a democracy: citizen.
The Republican nominee, John McCain, has worn the uniform of our country with bravery and distinction, and for that we owe him our gratitude and respect.
Now is the time to end this addiction, and to understand that drilling is a stop-gap measure, not a long-term solution.
So let me spell out exactly what that change would mean if I am President.
That's how we cleaned up our air and our water.
I also know that Islam has always been a part of America's story.
But think about the climate change issue.
That's a recipe for more cynicism and polarization in our politics.
That's why I'm committed to working with American Muslims to ensure that they can fulfill zakat.
Can we have some money?”  (Laughter.)
In the young people who voted for the first time, and in those who got involved again after a very long time.
Around the world, the Jewish people were persecuted for centuries, and anti-Semitism in Europe culminated in an unprecedented Holocaust.
I am suggesting that those highest expressions of our humanity can only flourish when our economy functions well, and proposed budgets add up, and our environment is protected.
Every American who serves joins an unbroken line of heroes that stretches from Lexington to Gettysburg; from Iwo Jima to Inchon; from Khe Sanh to Kandahar -- Americans who have fought to see that the lives of our children are better than our own.
You know, it's interesting that if we get sick, we actually want to make sure the doctors have gone to medical school, they know what they’re talking about.
So tonight, I am announcing that the American combat mission in Iraq has ended.
These are not opinions to be debated; these are facts to be dealt with.
It zigs and zags in fits and starts.
Of course, violence will not end with our combat mission.
Because next week, in Minnesota, the same party that brought you two terms of George Bush and Dick Cheney will ask this country for a third.
But if we see this conflict only from one side or the other, then we will be blind to the truth.
Point four:  Have faith in democracy.
When innocents in Bosnia and Darfur are slaughtered, that is a stain on our collective conscience.
Iraqis are a proud people.
If we don’t act, if we don't follow through on the progress we made in Paris, the progress we've been making here at home, your generation will feel the brunt of this catastrophe.
It is that spirit, born of the Enlightenment, that made us an economic powerhouse: the spirit that took flight at Kitty Hawk and Cape Canaveral, the spirit that cures disease and put a computer in every pocket.
And I'm also proud to carry with me the good will of the American people and a greeting of peace from Muslim communities in my country: As-salaamu alaykum.
So you’ve got the tools to lead us.
From this desk, seven and a half years ago, President Bush announced the beginning of military operations in Iraq.
Not with so much work to be done.
This country of ours has more wealth than any nation, but that's not what makes us rich.
I will eliminate capital gains taxes for the small businesses and the start-ups that will create the high-wage, high-tech jobs of tomorrow.
I come here for a simple reason -- to finally settle this pork roll vs. Taylor ham question.
That's why we honor Bill Moyers or Dr. Burnell.
That's not how moral authority is claimed; that's how it is surrendered.
I've seen our doctors and volunteers rebuild after earthquakes and stop pandemics in their tracks.
We must unleash the innovation that allows new products to roll off our assembly lines, and nurture the ideas that spring from our entrepreneurs.
As long as I am President, we will maintain the finest fighting force that the world has ever known, and we will do whatever it takes to serve our veterans as well as they have served us.
It's that spirit, a faith in reason and enterprise and the primacy of right over might, that allowed us to resist the lure of fascism and tyranny during the Great Depression; that allowed us to build a post-World War II order with other democracies, an order based not just on military power or national affiliations, but built on principles: the rule of law, human rights, freedom of religion and speech and assembly, and an independent press.
Throughout our history, America has been willing to bear the burden of promoting liberty and human dignity overseas, understanding its links to our own liberty and security.
Look, I'm not suggesting that cold analysis and hard data are ultimately more important in life than passion, or faith, or love, or loyalty.
Our economy doesn't work as well or grow as fast when a few prosper at the expense of a growing middle class and ladders for folks who want to get into the middle class.
I am convinced that our daughters can contribute just as much to society as our sons.
These are the rough waters encountered during the course of one of America’s longest wars.
To my remarkable staff: For 8 years—and for some of you, a whole lot more—I have drawn from your energy, and every day I tried to reflect back what you displayed: heart and character and idealism.
In just 8 years, we've halved our dependence on foreign oil, we've doubled our renewable energy, we've led the world to an agreement that has the promise to save this planet.
For the fight against extremism and intolerance and sectarianism and chauvinism are of a piece with the fight against authoritarianism and nationalist aggression.
We cannot turn back."
For decades then, there has been a stalemate: two peoples with legitimate aspirations, each with a painful history that makes compromise elusive.
We are shaped by every culture, drawn from every end of the Earth, and dedicated to a simple concept: E pluribus unum—"Out of many, one."
Theirs are the stories that shaped me.
The global coalition we're leading against ISIL has taken out their leaders and taken away about half their territory.
We have cut the high school dropout rate.
And that's to be expected.
So, anyway, all right.
But they cannot defeat America unless we betray our Constitution and our principles in the fight.
And it was a neighborhood not far from here where I began working with church groups in the shadows of closed steel mills.
I agree, our trade should be fair and not just free.
That together, our dreams can be one.
You don't protect Israel and deter Iran just by talking tough in Washington.
Fewer than one in five young people showed up to vote -- 2014.
If we're unwilling to invest in the children of immigrants, just because they don't look like us, we will diminish the prospects of our own children, because those Brown kids will represent a larger and larger share of America's workforce.
Now, I recognize it doesn’t feel like the planet is warmer right now.
And the Holy Koran also says, "whoever saves a person, it is as if he has saved all mankind."
Sometimes you took half a loaf.
Stand up for what you believe in.
And this is a difficult responsibility to embrace, for human history has often been a record of nations and tribes and, yes, religions subjugating one another in pursuit of their own interests.
This too is part of America's promise—the promise of a democracy where we can find the strength and grace to bridge divides and unite in common effort.
Sometimes it's been bloody.
He said that the fundamentals of the economy are strong.
I don't know what kind of lives John McCain thinks that celebrities lead, but this has been mine.
But I also know that human progress cannot be denied.
In the middle of the cold war, the United States played a role in the overthrow of a democratically elected Iranian Government.
That is in Israel's interest, Palestine's interest, America's interest, and the world's interest.
We must bring that same sense of self-discipline, that same sense of urgency, to the way we meet challenges here at home.
In just a moment, the Democratic majority leader, Senator Mitchell, will offer what is known as the Democratic response, often a rebuttal.
To all the challenges that confront this region of the world there is no single solution, no solely American answer.
Any workable solution must be judged as a whole, not piece by piece.
My friends, these days the world moves even more quickly, and now, after two great terms, a switch will be made.
And I believe that power must always be kept close to the individual - close to the hands that raise the family and run the home.
Those of you who saw the President's speech this week, and listened to the simple truth of his words, will understand my loyalty all these years.
Think about their sense of duty, about all they taught us about our values, about ourselves.
And we will do it.
These words have been our guide for more than two centuries as we've labored to form our more perfect union.
I will not allow this country to be made weak again.
One by one the unfree places fall, not to the force of arms but to the force of an idea: freedom works.
But if they do, believe me, the political reality is, no one can put a better one back together again.
It will not raise income tax rates, personal or corporate.
This does not mean stationing U.S. ground forces in the Arabian Peninsula, but it does mean American participation in joint exercises involving both air and ground forces.
America is tired of phony deficit reduction or promise-now, save-later plans.
A world where the United Nations, freed from cold war stalemate, is poised to fulfill the historic vision of its founders.
And finally, we should all sit up and listen to Jackie Jones, an Army lieutenant, when she says, "If we let him get away with this, who knows what's going to be next?"
And while the world waited, while the world talked peace and withdrawal, Saddam Hussein dug in and moved massive forces into Kuwait.
We are determined to knock out Saddam Hussein's nuclear bomb potential.
But we all know it's not.
To all of you, I just want to say your triumph is that your bill will now be law, and that this day belongs to you.
And they're doing one terrific job.
We have no argument with the people of Iraq.
In fact, we have started to do something.
Let us always be caring and good and generous in all we do.
And it has the largest spending savings ever—more than $300 billion.
And one thing more: In the pursuit of these goals America will not be intimidated.
Though liberal democrats have an odd view of it.
He says, "Let's free these people, so we can go home and be free again."
Instead, he tried to make this a dispute between Iraq and the United States of America.
I'm hopeful, in fact, I'm confident that the Congress will do what it should.
The world is still dangerous.
John Kennedy discovered poverty when he campaigned in West Virginia; there were children there who had no milk.
But it is the best agreement that can be legislated now.
And most importantly, most importantly of all, all those who served in the field.
And when his defeated legions come home, all Iraqis will see and feel the havoc he has wrought.
Consider the size of our triumph: A record high percentage of Americans with jobs, a record high rate of new businesses - a record high rate of real personal income.
Two parties this year ask for your support.
We also passed the aviation bill.
My opponent says no - but I say yes.
While the world waited, while Saddam stalled, more damage was being done to the fragile economies of the Third World, emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, to the entire world, including to our own economy.
Vital issues of principle are at stake.
Even the new world order cannot guarantee an era of perpetual peace.
We cut them in half.
Well, let me just say, Wade, America is proud of you and is grateful to every soldier, sailor, marine, and airman serving the cause of peace in the Persian Gulf.
Eight years later look at what the American people have produced: the highest level of economic growth in our entire history - and the lowest level of world tensions in more than fifty years.
First, I ask you to understand how important—and for some, how difficult—this vote is for your Congressmen and Senators.
With your help, we can at last put this budget crisis behind us and face the other challenges that lie ahead.
And they're telling us to put them in charge of the case again.
With today's signing of the landmark Americans for Disabilities Act, every man, woman, and child with a disability can now pass through once-closed doors into a bright new era of equality, independence, and freedom.
America is a rising nation.
Tonight, as our forces fight, they and their families are in our prayers.
For we are a nation of communities, of thousands and tens of thousands of ethnic, religious, social, business, labor union, neighborhood, regional and other organizations, all of them varied, voluntary and unique.
And so tonight is for big things.
It is a mockery of human decency to call these people "guests."
And I intend to speak for freedom, stand for freedom, and be a patient friend to anyone, east or west, who will fight for freedom.
It is a victory for the rule of law and for what is right.
I will give more kids a Head Start.
Armed forces from countries spanning four continents are there at the request of King Fahd of Saudi Arabia to deter and, if need be, to defend against attack.
Perhaps what is happening will change our world forever.
Evan, thank you so much.
Some say this isn't an election about ideology, it's an election about competence.
It was then that I decided to act to check that aggression.
And I'll make it easier to save for college.
I respect old fashioned common sense, and have no great love for the imaginings of social planners.
And now we must decide.
We've come far, but I think we need a new harmony among the races in our country.
It seems to me the Presidency provides an incomparable opportunity for "gentle persuasion."
We owe much to the outstanding leadership of Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar.
People don't see their experience as symbolic of an era - but of course we were.
One is that there is a God and He is good, and his love, while free, has a self imposed cost: We must be good to one another.
This year, before the Iraqi invasion, U.S. imports had risen to nearly 8 million barrels per day.
My opponent says no - but I say yes.
It must address the growth of government's hidden liabilities.
This is, indeed, an incredible day—especially for the thousands of people across the Nation who have given so much of their time, their vision, and their courage to see this act become a reality.
So, tonight I want to talk to you about what's at stake—what we must do together to defend civilized values around the world and maintain our economic strength at home.
By now, it should be plain to all parties that peacemaking in the Middle East requires compromise.
I also want to say a special word to our friends in the business community.
Because the world would not look the other way, Ambassador al-Sabah, tonight Kuwait is free.
Tonight, the battle has been joined.
It is the liberation of Kuwait.
There are millions of older Americans who were brutalized by inflation.
I reject the temptation to engage in personal references.
It belongs to the regulars, to the reserves, to the National Guard.
All of you have made this happen.
And many have a stake in the stability of the Persian Gulf.
America and the world will not be blackmailed by this ruthless policy.
So, if there ever was a time to put country before self and patriotism before party, the time is now.
Of course, of course, our hearts go out to the hostages and to their families.
And I want to thank Sandy Parrino, of course, for her leadership.
And that is the idea of community - a beautiful word with a big meaning.
The Persian Gulf and Middle East form a region rich in natural resources with a wealth of untapped human potential.
As Commander in Chief, I can report to you our armed forces fought with honor and valor.
But here at home there's another threat, a cancer gnawing away at our nation's health.
Most countries share our concern for principle.
I am guided by certain traditions.
So, tonight let me outline four key challenges to be met.
This is the first time in my Presidency that I've made an appeal like this to you, the American people.
I cannot predict just how long it will take to convince Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait.
After all, the facts are on our side.
Instead, he remained intransigent, certain that time was on his side.
The majority of them created in the past six years paid an average of more than $22,000 a year.
And although free people in a free society are bound to have their differences, Americans traditionally come together in times of adversity and challenge.
This past weekend, in a last-ditch effort, the Secretary-General of the United Nations went to the Middle East with peace in his heart—his second such mission.
I thank the voters who supported me.
As for me, I have held high office and done the work of democracy day by day.
They emerged from their bunker broken, tears streaming from their eyes, fearing the worst.
And this I promise you: For all that Saddam has done to his own people, to the Kuwaitis, and to the entire world, Saddam and those around him are accountable.
But only one has proved it can deliver.
Either way, we're in an unprecedented position to change the nature of our relationship.
I am going to have the FBI trace the medical wastes and we are going to punish the people who dump those infected needles into our oceans, lakes and rivers.
And now I turn to the American people to share my hopes and intentions, and why - and where - I wish to lead.
One issue Look at the world on this bright August night.
For ours will never be a truly prosperous nation until all within it prosper.
Let me tell you more about the mission.
We're now in sight of a United Nations that performs as envisioned by its founders.
We will do it - by maintaining our commitment to free and fair trade, by keeping government spending down, and by keeping taxes down.
It is that simple - and that big.
In the war just ended, there were clear-cut objectives—timetables—and, above all, an overriding imperative to achieve results.
Iran and Iraq move toward peace.
Listen to Master Sergeant J.P. Kendall of the 82d Airborne: "We're here for more than just the price of a gallon of gas.
Let their return remind us that all those who have gone before are linked with us in the long line of freedom's march.
They are the Nation's finest.
Some would say it's soft and insufficiently tough to care about these things.
Should our children have the right to say a voluntary prayer, or even observe a moment of silence in the schools?
We will not stoop to the level of using human beings as bargaining chips ever."
I know the liberal democrats are worried about the economy.
They've already intercepted more than 700 ships to enforce the sanctions.
Everyone who can should contribute something, and no one should have to contribute beyond their fair share.
And they did it using America's state-of-the-art technology.
Tonight, I ask every community in this country to make this coming Fourth of July a day of special celebration for our returning troops.
Our uncommon coalition must now work in common purpose: to forge a future that should never again be held hostage to the darker side of human nature.
Let us honor them as individuals—men and women of every race, all creeds and colors—by setting the face of this nation against discrimination, bigotry, and hate.
I seek the presidency for a single purpose, a purpose that has motivated millions of Americans across the years and the ocean voyages.
Let it be clear: Our vital national interests depend on a stable and secure Gulf.
I have come to this hall to tell you, and to tell America: Tonight is the night.
Competence is the creed of the technocrat who makes sure the gears mesh but doesn't for a second understand the magic of the machine.
This is the first assault on the new world that we seek, the first test of our mettle.
There is something noble and majestic about the pride, about the patriotism that we feel tonight.
At home, the material cost of our leadership can be steep.
Interest rates were more than 21.
So, to everyone here and everyone watching at home, think about the men and women of Desert Storm.
Our commitment to peace in the Middle East does not end with the liberation of Kuwait.
I'm hopeful that this fighting will not go on for long and that casualties will be held to an absolute minimum.
Government is part of the nation of communities - not the whole, just a part.
Arab leaders sought what became known as an Arab solution, only to conclude that Saddam Hussein was unwilling to leave Kuwait.
A prudent skepticism is in order.
Any one of us alone might have written a better plan.
But if we succeed, every American will have a large burden lifted.
No President can easily commit our sons and daughters to war.
And we must clean the air.
It is Iraq against the world.
For instance:  Should public school teachers be required to lead our children in the pledge of allegiance?
Tonight we ask you to help us move this agreement forward.
While the world waited, Saddam sought to add to the chemical weapons arsenal he now possesses, an infinitely more dangerous weapon of mass destruction—a nuclear weapon.
May God bless this great nation, the United States of America.
However, Saddam clearly felt that by stalling and threatening and defying the United Nations, he could weaken the forces arrayed against him.
It is my hope that somehow the Iraqi people can, even now, convince their dictator that he must lay down his arms, leave Kuwait, and let Iraq itself rejoin the family of peace-loving nations.
Indeed, for the innocents caught in this conflict, I pray for their safety.
These goals are not ours alone.
Today that new world is struggling to be born, a world quite different from the one we've known.
Kuwait's legitimate government must be restored.
The Gulf situation helps us realize we are more economically vulnerable than we ever should be.
This is an immensely important day, a day that belongs to all of you.
This is an historic moment.
The recent challenge could not have been clearer.
Saddam Hussein was the villain; Kuwait, the victim.
The ADA is a dramatic renewal not only for those with disabilities but for all of us, because along with the precious privilege of being an American comes a sacred duty to ensure that every other American's rights are also guaranteed.
Just as important, I am convinced that this agreement will help lower interest rates.
And we'd moved in the wrong direction.
Lived in a little shotgun house, one room for the three of us.
And now we've proposed a national energy strategy.
For example, in 1990, we enacted an historic Clean Air Act.
And he came back from Baghdad with no progress at all in getting Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait.
And surely, that is now clear.
I had hoped that when the United States Congress, in historic debate, took its resolute action, Saddam would realize he could not prevail and would move out of Kuwait in accord with the United Nation resolutions.
Out of these troubled times, our fifth objective—a new world order—can emerge: a new era—freer from the threat of terror, stronger in the pursuit of justice, and more secure in the quest for peace.
Let us learn from them as well.
We believed in getting ahead - but blind ambition wasn't our way.
This job has four basic parts.
We continue to hope that Iraq's leaders will recalculate just what their aggression has cost them.
Our objectives in the Persian Gulf are clear, our goals defined and familiar: Iraq must withdraw from Kuwait completely, immediately, and without condition.
I'm the one who won't raise taxes.
We got it down to four.
I am proud of my army and its men.
No family, no nation can continue to do business the way the Federal Government has been operating and survive.
They see "community" as a limited cluster of interest groups, locked in odd conformity.
Sanctions will take time to have their full intended effect.
A hundred generations have searched for this elusive path to peace, while a thousand wars raged across the span of human endeavor.
I have many friends to thank tonight.
This year, we've sent up our new highway bill.
Legally, it will provide our disabled community with a powerful expansion of protections and then basic civil rights.
Five months ago, Saddam Hussein started this cruel war against Kuwait.
And most of all, it will not let our economy slip out of control.
Twice before, those hopes proved to be a distant dream, beyond the grasp of man.
No peaceful international order is possible if larger states can devour their smaller neighbors."
Unite with us, work with us.
And listen to what they say, for they've said it better than any President or Prime Minister ever could.
And there are the homeless.
Tonight the Democratic and Republican leadership and I all speak with one voice in support of this agreement.
In Helsinki, our joint statement affirmed to the world our shared resolve to counter Iraq's threat to peace.
They remind us who keeps America strong: they do.
We will stand by our friends.
I will modernize and preserve our technological edge.
We lifted the yoke of aggression and tyranny from a small country that many Americans had never even heard of, and we ask nothing in return.
Last year, we celebrated a victory of international freedom.
Pretty soon the patient was up, back on his feet, and stronger than ever.
Well, when given the opportunity to be independent, they will move proudly into the economic mainstream of American life, and that's what this legislation is all about.
I commend, in particular, Saudi Arabia, Japan, and several European nations who have joined us in this purely humanitarian effort.
Its passage has made the United States the international leader on this human rights issue.
Every one of our children deserves a first rate school.
This is the vision that I shared with President Gorbachev in Helsinki.
And the parents who settled hungry Kansas would take their children in from the fields when a teacher came.
And I am not going to let anyone take it away from us.
I'll try to hold my charisma in check.
And thank you very, very much from a grateful people.
It is to allow us to pursue "the better angels," to give us time to think and grow.
We will surely have change this year, but will it be change that moves us forward?
These valiant Americans were ready at a moment's notice to leave their spouses and their children, to serve on the front line halfway around the world.
Their teams play just like others, but—and this is the most remarkable part—as they play, at their sides are volunteer buddies from conventional Little League teams.
Our economic life is not the only test of our success, overwhelms all the others, and that is the issue of peace.
The test we face is great, and so are the stakes.
We applaud you and your shining example.
And we're very happy about that.
And third, we must work to create new opportunities for peace and stability in the Middle East.
We saw the excellence embodied in the Patriot missile and the patriots who made it work.
Fourth, we must foster economic development for the sake of peace and progress.
They call for Iraq's immediate and unconditional withdrawal, the restoration of Kuwait's legitimate government, and categorically reject Iraq's cynical and self-serving attempt to annex Kuwait.
Listen to Hollywood Huddleston, Marine lance corporal.
Our ability to function effectively as a great power abroad depends on how we conduct ourselves at home.
We hear so often about our young people in turmoil—how our children fall short, how our schools fail us, how American products and American workers are second-class.
There is much that we must do, at home and abroad.
But we're the people who sundered a nation rather than allow a sin called slavery - we're the people who rose from the ghettos and the deserts.
There's graft in city hall, the greed on Wall Street; there's influence peddling in Washington, and the small corruptions of everyday ambition.
We must change from abortion - to adoption.
This is never easy in democracies, for we govern only with the consent of the governed.
Worked in the oil business, started my own.
Well, don't you believe it.
But enduring peace must be our mission.
Now, we can see a new world coming into view.
It means teaching troubled children through your presence that there's such a thing as reliable love.
And if, with the Congress, we can develop a satisfactory program by the end of the month, we can avoid the ax of sequester—deep across-the-board cuts that would threaten our military capacity and risk substantial domestic disruption.
It is time for a program that is credible and real.
And they're right, it is.
And today, America welcomes into the mainstream of life all of our fellow citizens with disabilities.
If we continue to grow at our current rate, we will be able to produce 30 million jobs in the next eight years.
Eight years ago I stood here with Ronald Reagan and we promised, together, to break with the past and return America to her greatness.
Young Teddy Roosevelt met the new America when he roamed the immigrant streets of New York.
And finally, to the extent that the deficit reduction program includes new revenue measures, it must avoid any measure that would threaten economic growth or turn us back toward the days of punishing income tax rates.
But Wade also wrote, "I am proud of my country and its firm stance against inhumane aggression.
The answer is clear: The world could wait no longer.
In my State of the Union Address and in my budget, I defined a comprehensive agenda to prepare for the next American century.
Across the Nation, some 10,000 youngsters with disabilities are part of Little League's Challenger Division.
Let us honor those who have served us by serving others.
We must let these children be our guides and inspiration.
Or change that risks retreat?
I have been pleased with recent progress, although it has not always seemed so smooth.
I mean to run hard, to fight hard, to stand on the issues - and I mean to win.
All of us know the depth of bitterness that has made the dispute between Israel and its neighbors so painful and intractable.
Everywhere I look, I see people who have dedicated themselves to making sure that this day would come to pass: my friends from Congress, as I say, who worked so diligently with the best interest of all at heart, Democrats and Republicans; members of this administration—and I'm pleased to see so many top officials and members of my Cabinet here today who brought their caring and expertise to this fight; and then, the organizations—so many dedicated organizations for people with disabilities, who gave their time and their strength; and perhaps most of all, everyone out there and others—across the breadth of this nation are 43 million Americans with disabilities.
They set out to confront an enemy abroad, and in the process, they transformed a nation at home.
It's the toughest deficit reduction package ever, with new enforcement rules to make sure that what we fix now stays fixed.
They want to work, and they can work, and this is a tremendous pool of people.
These attacks continue as I speak.
America and the world must defend common vital interests—and we will.
For seven and a half years I have worked with a President - and I have seen what crosses that big desk.
The tactics of terror lead absolutely nowhere.
Is it right to believe in the sanctity of life and protect the lives of innocent children?
We passed the landmark Americans with Disabilities Act.
And let me say to everyone listening or watching tonight: When the troops we've sent in finish their work, I am determined to bring them home as soon as possible.
But we can make a difference.
If producers, including the United States, continue steps to expand oil and gas production, we can stabilize prices and guarantee against hardship.
It's time to put an end to micromanagement of foreign and security assistance programs—micromanagement that humiliates our friends and allies and hamstrings our diplomacy.
In fact, that is a burden that any truly fair solution must carry.
It will not mess with Social Security in any way.
It's a little-known fact, but America's best job creators and greatest innovators tend to be our smaller companies.
We're on a journey to a new century, and we've got to leave the tired old baggage of bigotry behind.
We went halfway around the world to do what is moral and just and right.
He and other leaders from Europe, the Gulf, and around the world understand that how we manage this crisis today could shape the future for generations to come.
As I report to you, air attacks are underway against military targets in Iraq.
And while you're standing—[laughter]—this military victory also belongs to the one the British call the "Man of the Match"—the tower of calm at the eye of Desert Storm—General Norman Schwarzkopf.
Our role then: to deter future aggression.
And I am pleased that we are working together to build a new relationship.
If they can come together under such adversity, if old adversaries like the Soviet Union and the United States can work in common cause, then surely we who are so fortunate to be in this great Chamber—Democrats, Republicans, liberals, conservatives—can come together to fulfill our responsibilities here.
This military action, taken in accord with United Nations resolutions and with the consent of the United States Congress, follows months of constant and virtually endless diplomatic activity on the part of the United Nations, the United States, and many, many other countries.
And third, the Congress should, this month, enact measures to increase domestic energy production and energy conservation in order to reduce dependence on foreign oil.
Thank you all very, very much.
The fact is prosperity has a purpose.
And he must be able to define - and lead - a mission.
As we speak, our nation is standing together against Saddam Hussein's aggression.
Not by preemptive concession - but by keeping our strength.
This deficit reduction agreement is tough, and so are the times.
Let me also make clear that the United States has no quarrel with the Iraqi people.
And only a tiny fraction of goods gets through.
But this election isn't only about competence, for competence is a narrow ideal.
This is but a portion of what is needed.
It predated Saddam Hussein's aggression and will survive it.
In the face of danger, they're brave, they're well-trained, and dedicated.
When I spoke in this House about the state of our Union, I asked all of you: If we can selflessly confront evil for the sake of good in a land so far away, then surely we can make this land all that it should be.
Your Senators and Congressmen need to know that you want this deficit brought down, that the time for politics and posturing is over, and the time to come together is now.
This budget agreement is the result of 8 months of blood, sweat, and fears—fears of the economic chaos that would follow if we fail to reduce the deficit.
Now, let me tell you what this agreement will not do.
I've talked to farmers about the bills they can't pay.
Well, these rules do apply.
This principle must be elaborated to provide for Israel's security and recognition and at the same time for legitimate Palestinian political rights.
The consequences of regional instability can be global.
My friends, I am that man.
To those young people I say, "You have the opportunity you deserve - and I'm not going to let them take it away from you."
At the bright center is the individual.
The war was over, and we wanted to get out and make it on our own.
We've learned the hard lessons of history.
Tonight in Iraq, Saddam walks amidst ruin.
Tonight I challenge the young people of our country to shut down the drug dealers around the world.
Iraq plus Kuwait controls twice that.
Think of the way they went about their mission—with confidence and quiet pride.
You have in your hands the key to the success of this act, for you can unlock a splendid resource of untapped human potential that, when freed, will enrich us all.
For seven and a half years I have helped a President conduct the most difficult job on earth.
A comprehensive peace must be grounded in United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 and the principle of territory for peace.
Clearly, no longer can a dictator count on East-West confrontation to stymie concerted United Nations action against aggression.
Someone better take a message to Michael: Tell him we've been creating good jobs at good wages.
Today's legislation brings us closer to that day when no Americans will ever again be deprived of their basic guarantee of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
We have not forgotten them, and we will not forget them.
And when you add together Federal, State, local, and private funds, it costs almost $200 billion annually to support Americans with disabilities—in effect, to keep them dependent.
This is just the beginning of a steady flow of American troops coming home.
Thank you for your leadership for all that are here today.
Our objectives are clear: Saddam Hussein's forces will leave Kuwait.
An era in which the nations of the world, East and West, North and South, can prosper and live in harmony.
I've also asked him to raise the plight of the hostages held in Lebanon.
A world where the rule of law supplants the rule of the jungle.
Members of Congress, 5 short weeks ago I came to this House to speak to you about the state of the Union.
And American citizens abroad must be protected.
The stakes are high this year and the choice is crucial, for the differences between the two candidates are as deep and wide as they have ever been in our long history.
For the sake of our principles, for the sake of the Kuwaiti people, we stood our ground.
Twice this century, out of the horrors of war hope emerged for enduring peace.
Our economy is strong but not invulnerable, and the peace is broad but can be broken.
And through specific new incentives, it will help create more jobs.
It's been a coalition in the finest spirit—a joining of Democrats and Republicans, of the legislative and the executive branches, of Federal and State agencies, of public officials and private citizens, of people with disabilities and without.
Clearly, each and every one of us can find fault with something in this agreement.
This agreement will also raise revenue.
It will ensure that people with disabilities are given the basic guarantees for which they have worked so long and so hard: independence, freedom of choice, control of their lives, the opportunity to blend fully and equally into the rich mosaic of the American mainstream.
And third, the ADA ensures expanded access to transportation services.
I also want to thank the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Powell; the Chiefs here tonight; our commander in the Persian Gulf, General Schwartzkopf; and the men and women of the Department of Defense.
And in our America, the most generous, optimistic nation on the face of the Earth, we must not and will not rest until every man and woman with a dream has the means to achieve it.
So was everyone else who was taking a chance and pushing into unknown territory with kids and a dog and a car.
I want a kinder, gentler nation.
But to go beyond such levels, where cutting defense would threaten our vital margin of safety, is something I will never accept.
I have seen modest decisions made with anguish, and crucial decisions made with dispatch.
These countries had hoped the use of force could be avoided.
They promise - we perform.
We celebrated the individual - but we weren't self -centered.
And let me thank all Americans, especially those here in this Chamber tonight, for your support for our armed forces and for their mission.
But I want to reassure you right now that my administration and the United States Congress have carefully crafted this Act.
Americans have always tried to serve, to sacrifice nobly for what we believe to be right.
I do not hate government.
Both will speak of growth and peace.
And today, we're ready to do the same thing with our schools and expand choice in education.
And they're good jobs.
But if you don't obey these simple rules of common sense, there's a price to pay.
And you must know us.
Even with our obligations in the Gulf, a sound defense budget can have some reduction in real terms; and we're prepared to accept that.
Thomas Paine wrote many years ago: "These are the times that try men's souls."
But they're not going to be left out anymore.
I may sometimes be a little awkward, but there's nothing self-conscious in my love of country.
And then there was an American soldier.
I like what's been tested and found to be true.
Should society be allowed to impose the death penalty on those who commit crimes of extraordinary cruelty and violence?
I have called upon Hollywood and Walter and J.P. and Jackie and all their courageous comrades-in-arms to do what must be done.
For it is the family that communicates to our children - to the 21st century - our culture, our religious faith, our traditions and history.
Many of you have asked, "When will this campaign really begin?"
I have an adopted granddaughter.
These provisions mean so much to so many.
Well, it's nice of them to want to play on our field.
Sanctions were tried for well over 5 months, and we and our allies concluded that sanctions alone would not force Saddam from Kuwait.
Once again, we rejoice as this barrier falls for claiming together we will not accept, we will not excuse, we will not tolerate discrimination in America.
The agreement is bipartisan, and so is the vote.
We moved to west Texas 40 years ago.
If our forces could win the ground war in 100 hours, then surely the Congress can pass this legislation in 100 days.
But when you have to change horses in midstream, doesn't it make sense to switch to the one who's going the same way?
We're going to keep the Social Security trust fund sound, and out of reach of the big spenders.
And fourth, the Congress should, this month, enact a 5-year program to reduce the projected debt and deficits by $500 billion—that's by half a trillion dollars.
They team up to wheel around the bases and to field grounders together and, most of all, just to play and become friends.
A world in which there is the very real prospect of a new world order.
But since someone brought up competence.
Listen to one of our great officers out there, Marine Lieutenant General Walter Boomer.
An Iraq permitted to swallow Kuwait would have the economic and military power, as well as the arrogance, to intimidate and coerce its neighbors—neighbors who control the lion's share of the world's remaining oil reserves.
Soon, very soon, our troops will begin the march we've all been waiting for—their march home.
Once again, Americans have stepped forward to share a tearful goodbye with their families before leaving for a strange and distant shore.
I will keep America moving forward, always forward - for a better America, for an endless enduring dream and a thousand points of light.
Our world leadership and domestic strength are mutual and reinforcing; a woven piece, strongly bound as Old Glory.
The day of her christening we wept with joy.
We cannot permit a resource so vital to be dominated by one so ruthless.
If we fail to enact this agreement, our economy will falter, markets may tumble, and recession will follow.
Now they're marrying and starting careers.
We're glad you're here.
Most Americans are sick and tired of endless battles in the Congress and between the branches over budget matters.
Hide Transcript  Just 2 hours ago, allied air forces began an attack on military targets in Iraq and Kuwait.
All of us grieve for the victims of war, for the people of Kuwait and the suffering that scars the soul of that proud nation.
The Congress will push me to raise taxes, and I'll say no, and they'll push, and I'll say no, and they'll push again, and I'll say to them, "Read my lips: no new taxes."
God bless you, and good night.
And if we fail to act, next year alone we will face a Federal budget deficit of more than $300 billion, a deficit that could weaken our economy further and cost us thousands of precious jobs.
But now that the war is over, oil prices are down, interest rates are down, and confidence is rightly coming back.
From the outset, acting hand in hand with others, we've sought to fashion the broadest possible international response to Iraq's aggression.
There have been other missions for me - Congress, China, the CIA.
The truth is, this election is about the beliefs we share, the values we honor, the principles we hold dear.
Now we are on the verge of a new century, and what country's name will it bear?
You have made this happen.
My friends, they're lucky we don't hit them with a malpractice suit!
In the words of Winston Churchill, a world order in which "the principles of justice and fair play protect the weak against the strong.
Our interest, our involvement in the Gulf is not transitory.
Urge them to do what the bipartisan leadership has done: come together in the spirit of compromise to solve this national problem.
It's been the work of a true coalition, a strong and inspiring coalition of people who have shared both a dream and a passionate determination to make that dream come true.
And that's what this agreement will do.
At the same time, peace brings real benefits to everyone.
That's why Secretary of State Baker and Treasury Secretary Brady have met with many world leaders to underscore that the burden of this collective effort must be shared.
It is high time we pulled together and get the job done right.
We have a new relationship with the Soviet Union.
I've told the American people before that this will not be another Vietnam, and I repeat this here tonight.
Tonight, America and the world are deeply grateful to them and to their families.
Thomas Paine said many years ago, "These are the times that try men's souls."
I thank God her parents chose life.
With us in that wonderful crowd out there are people representing 18 of the daily Points of Light that I've named for their extraordinary involvement with the disabled community.
But I am here tonight - and I am your candidate - because the most important work of my life is to complete the mission we started in 1980.
Unemployment was up and climbing, now it's the lowest in 14 years.
And radiating out from him or her is the family, the essential unit of closeness and of love.
They've been endorsed by the United Nations Security Council five times in as many weeks.
In time we had six children.
Ronald Reagan asked for, and received, my candor.
He must see to it that government intrudes as little as possible in the lives of the people; and yet remember that it is the nation's character.
But that's not what community means - not to me.
And above all, I thank those whose unfailing love and support sustained our courageous men and women: I thank the American people.
And now we've sent forward our civil rights bill.
Within 3 days, 120,000 Iraqi troops with 850 tanks had poured into Kuwait and moved south to threaten Saudi Arabia.
And then, specifically, first the ADA ensures that employers covered by the act cannot discriminate against qualified individuals with disabilities.
And Mr. Speaker, thank you, sir, for those very generous words spoken from the heart about the wonderful performance of our military.
This conflict started August 2d when the dictator of Iraq invaded a small and helpless neighbor.
The troops know why they're there.
A world where the strong respect the rights of the weak.
Tonight, we meet in a world blessed by the promise of peace.
America will work tirelessly as a catalyst for positive change.
Saddam was warned over and over again to comply with the will of the United Nations: Leave Kuwait, or be driven out.
Anything else would fail the twin test of fairness and security.
But America is not a decline.
And you know, it doesn't do any good to debate endlessly which policy mistake of the '70's is responsible.
Our operations are designed to best protect the lives of all the coalition forces by targeting Saddam's vast military arsenal.
I thank the gallant men who entered the contest for the presidency this year, and who have honored me with their support.
My opponent says no - but I say yes.
It would be tragic if the nations of the Middle East and Persian Gulf were now, in the wake of war, to embark on a new arms race.
I'm not, and I know you're not, a fan of tax increases.
And recognizing this was a coalition effort, let us not forget Saudi General Khalid, Britain's General de la Billiere, or General Roquejeoffre of France, and all the others whose leadership played such a vital role.
So, tonight I call on the Congress to move forward aggressively on our domestic front.
Of course, I cannot claim it's the best deficit reduction plan possible.
I say it will be another American century.
If they're Democrats, urge them to stand with their congressional leaders.
That is one path we should not head down again.
The Civil Rights Act of '64 took a bold step towards righting that wrong.
Competence makes the trains run on time but doesn't know where they're going.
This has been called the American Century, because in it we were the dominant force for good in the world.
But I want to enlist the help of some people who are rarely included.
But I'll try to be fair to the other side.
In the early morning hours of August 2d, following negotiations and promises by Iraq's dictator Saddam Hussein not to use force, a powerful Iraqi army invaded its trusting and much weaker neighbor, Kuwait.
My parents were prosperous; their children were lucky.
And we're going to win with the help of Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana - a young leader who has become a forceful voice in preparing America's workers for the labor force of the future.
We passed a child-care bill that put power in the hands of parents.
And for me to do that, a budget agreement must meet these tests: It must include the measures I've recommended to increase economic growth and reduce dependence on foreign oil.
But now you must see me for what I am: The Republican candidate for President of the United States.
I am also heartened to report that this international response extends to the neediest victims of this conflict—those refugees.
But America, don't let 'em fool ya.
And now who do we hear knocking on the door but the doctors who made him sick.
Everyone will bear a small burden.
Our goal is not the conquest of Iraq.
He did not do that.
Our challenges are great, but our will is greater.
In the time since then, the brave men and women of Desert Storm accomplished more than even they may realize.
He sees America as another pleasant country on the UN roll call, somewhere between Albania and Zimbabwe.
Prosperity with a purpose means taking your idealism and making it concrete by certain acts of goodness.
There's an energy-related cost to be borne as well.
It's up to us to straighten this out.
He said: "There are things worth fighting for.
Now, the challenge is to reach higher, to foster economic freedom and prosperity for all the people of the region.
Our success with this act proves that we are keeping faith with the spirit of our courageous forefathers who wrote in the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights."
The crisis in the Persian Gulf, as grave as it is, also offers a rare opportunity to move toward an historic period of cooperation.
When I was a torpedo bomber pilot they defined the mission for us.
We are a good people, a generous people.
Inflation was 12 percent when we came in.
But let's be frank.
But for too long, the Nation's business in Washington has been conducted as if these basic rules did not apply.
And I can assure you that we in the executive branch will do our part.
The Security Council has also taken the decisive step of authorizing the use of all means necessary to ensure compliance with these sanctions.
I hope we can work out a responsible plan.
Now the 28 countries with forces in the Gulf area have exhausted all reasonable efforts to reach a peaceful resolution—have no choice but to drive Saddam from Kuwait by force.
Weakness and ambivalence lead to war.
I hope to stand for a new harmony, a greater tolerance.
In a very real sense, this victory belongs to them—to the privates and the pilots, to the sergeants and the supply officers, to the men and women in the machines and the men and women who made them work.
Nor do we exaggerate when we say Saddam Hussein will fail.
And we must then take advantage of our energy sources across the board: coal, natural gas, hydro, and nuclear.
The fact is, they talk - we deliver.
Finally, the United Nations has demanded the release of all foreign nationals held hostage against their will and in contravention of international law.
As I've pointed out before, conservation efforts are essential to keep our energy needs as low as possible.
Ground forces are not engaged.
And lower interest rates mean savings for consumers, lower mortgage payments for new homeowners, and more investment to produce more jobs.
May God bless each and every one of them, and the coalition forces at our side in the Gulf, and may He continue to bless our nation, the United States of America.
With, again, great thanks to the Members of the United States Senate, leaders of whom are here today, and those who worked so tirelessly for this legislation on both sides of the aisles.
To the aid of this small country came nations from North America and Europe, from Asia and South America, from Africa and the Arab world, all united against aggression.
Kuwait—a member of the Arab League and a member of the United Nations—was crushed; its people, brutalized.
We stand today at a unique and extraordinary moment.
At this moment, our brave servicemen and women stand watch in that distant desert and on distant seas, side by side with the forces of more than 20 other nations.
That deficit was already greater than it should have been—a projected $232 billion for the coming year.
Resources once squandered on military might must be redirected to more peaceful ends.
I want to be able to tell the American people that we have truly solved the deficit problem.
I learned that the good done by a single good job can be felt in ways you can't imagine.
These measures include extending incentives for research and experimentation; expanding the use of IRA's for new homeowners; establishing tax-deferred family savings accounts; creating incentives for the creation of enterprise zones and initiatives to encourage more domestic drilling; and, yes, reducing the tax rate on capital gains.
In 1940, when I was barely more than a boy, Franklin Roosevelt said we shouldn't change horses in midstream.
Now, let me just tell you a wonderful story, a story about children already working in the spirit of the ADA—a story that really touched me.
In the trying circumstances of the Gulf, the morale of our service men and women is excellent.
I want a drug free America - and this will not be easy to achieve.
It is that learning is good in and of itself.
Let me quote: "We are united in the belief that Iraq's aggression must not be tolerated.
What it all comes down to is this:  My opponent's view of the world sees a long slow decline for our country, an inevitable fall mandated by impersonal historical forces.
We arrested it - and we're not going to let it out on furlough.
We fought hard and, with others, we won the war.
But they diminish our triumph when they act as if wealth is an end in itself.
Regrettably, we now believe that only force will make him leave.
While the world waited, Saddam Hussein met every overture of peace with open contempt.
But I know you know the importance of the whole.
Yet, in the conflict just concluded, Israel and many of the Arab States have for the first time found themselves confronting the same aggressor.
When you get a bill, that bill must be paid.
When a politician talks like that, you know that's one resort he'll be checking into.
That's why they sweat and toil in the sand and the heat and the sun.
We met then in time of war.
Well, many of our fellow citizens with disabilities are unemployed.
First, we must work together to create shared security arrangements in the region.
First, the Congress should, this month, within a budget agreement, enact growth-oriented tax measures—to help avoid recession in the short term and to increase savings, investment, productivity, and competitiveness for the longer term.
The consequences of the conflict in the Gulf reach far beyond the confines of the Middle East.
And I guarantee you: No one will work harder for a stable peace in the region than we will.
His ability to threaten mass destruction is itself destroyed.
The INF treaty - the beginning of the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan - the beginning of the end of the Soviet proxy war in Angola, and with it the independence of Namibia.
Iraq will eventually comply with all relevant United Nations resolutions, and then, when peace is restored, it is our hope that Iraq will live as a peaceful and cooperative member of the family of nations, thus enhancing the security and stability of the Gulf.
Three regional leaders I spoke with just yesterday told me that these sanctions are working.
But we must act this week, when Congress will hold the first of two crucial up-or-down votes.
Well, that's the way it may look to the three blind mice.
We embrace you for your abilities and for your disabilities, for our similarities and indeed for our differences, for your past courage and your future dreams.
The communique with President Gorbachev made mention of what happens when the embargo is so effective that children of Iraq literally need milk or the sick truly need medicine.
For the first time, a Republican President and leaders of a Democratic Congress have agreed to real cuts that will be enforced by law, not promises—no smoke, no mirrors, no magic act, but real and lasting spending cuts.
Lisa Carl, a young Washington State woman with cerebral palsy, who I'm told is with us today, now will always be admitted to her hometown theater.
Let that be a promise we make tonight to the American people.
Together with our friends and allies, ships of the United States Navy are today patrolling Mideast waters.
And one way you know our opponents know the facts is that to attack the record they have to misrepresent it.
Today we're here to rejoice in and celebrate another "independence day," one that is long overdue.
We saved Europe, cured polio, we went to the moon, and lit the world with our culture.
I am proud to serve my country."
Our Secretary of State, James Baker, held an historic meeting in Geneva, only to be totally rebuffed.
Tonight, 28 nations—countries from 5 continents, Europe and Asia, Africa, and the Arab League—have forces in the Gulf area standing shoulder to shoulder against Saddam Hussein.
The legitimate government of Kuwait will be restored to its rightful place, and Kuwait will once again be free.
The response of most of our friends and allies has been good.
His war machine is crushed.
The agreement is real, and so is this crisis.
The fear and uncertainty caused by the Gulf crisis were understandable.
Initial reports from General Schwarzkopf are that our operations are proceeding according to plan.
I will put incentives back into the domestic energy industry, for I know from personal experience there is no security for the United States in further dependence on foreign oil.
And my fellow Americans, we passed that test.
America and the world must support the rule of law—and we will.
The victory over Iraq was not waged as "a war to end all wars."
The United States, together with the United Nations, exhausted every means at our disposal to bring this crisis to a peaceful end.
I will move toward further cuts in the strategic and conventional arsenals of both the United States and the Soviet Union.
They may have missed Thanksgiving and Christmas, but I can tell you this: For them and for their families, we can make this a holiday they'll never forget.
If we do, the long-term result will be a healthier nation and something more: We will have once again put ourselves on the path of economic growth, and we will have demonstrated that no challenge is greater than the determination of the American people.
Tell them what you think of people who underwrite the dealers who put poison in our society.
I want power in the hands of parents.
The quest for solutions to the problems in Lebanon, in the Arab-Israeli dispute, and in the Gulf must go forward with new vigor and determination.
All of these players work together.
More than half of what was lost has been made up.
That's not a threat, that's not a boast, that's just the way it's going to be.
Less than 2 hours from now, the first planeload of American soldiers will lift off from Saudi Arabia, headed for the U.S.A. That plane will carry the men and women of the 24th Mechanized Infantry Division bound for Fort Stewart, Georgia.
I accept your nomination for President.
And when you write a check, you're supposed to have money in the bank.
While the world prayed for peace, Saddam prepared for war.
Americans are a caring people.
And, for their kind and stirring words, I thank Governor Tom Kean of New Jersey - Senator Phil Gramm of Texas - President Gerald Ford - and my friend, President Ronald Reagan.
Tonight I want to talk to you about a problem that has lingered and dogged and vexed this country for far too long: the Federal budget deficit.
And we saw soldiers who know about honor and bravery and duty and country and the world-shaking power of these simple words.
But where is it written that we must act as if we do not care, as if we are not moved?
Twice before in this century, an entire world was convulsed by war.
To my friends in Congress, together we must act this very month—before the next fiscal year begins on October 1st—to get America's economic house in order.
I say it without boast or bravado, I've fought for my country, I've served, I've built - and I will go from the hills to the hollows, from the cities to the suburbs to the loneliest town on the quietest street to take our message of hope and growth for every American to every American.
But the stark fact remained that people with disabilities were still victims of segregation and discrimination, and this was intolerable.
It's time to turn away from the temptation to protect unneeded weapons systems and obsolete bases.
But there were lessons we had to learn about life.
And welcome to every one of you, out there in this splendid scene of hope, spread across the South Lawn of the White House.
They are cut off from world trade, unable to sell their oil.
Let us comfort the families of the fallen and remember each precious life lost.
The tremors in the Soviet world continue.
He said: "It's okay.
But we want them to know that just as we stood with them to repel aggression, so now America stands ready to work with them to secure the peace.
On behalf of our nation, thank you very, very much.
They're worried it's going to remain strong.
And so I know that what it all comes down to, this election - what it all comes down to, after all the shouting and the cheers - is the man at the desk.
But with or without agreement from the budget summit, I ask both Houses of the Congress to allow a straight up-or-down vote on a complete $500-billion deficit reduction package not later than September 28.
I hear them and I am moved, and their concerns are mine.
Our economy, our Armed Forces, our energy dependence, and our cohesion all determine whether we can help our friends and stand up to our foes.
It will not put America's national security at risk.
My opponent says no - but I say yes.
These measures should include my proposals to increase incentives for domestic oil and gas exploration, fuel-switching, and to accelerate the development of the Alaskan energy resources without damage to wildlife.
A victory for unprecedented international cooperation and diplomacy, so well led by our Secretary of State, James Baker.
There can be no substitute for diplomacy.
Tonight, as our troops begin to come home, let us recognize that the hard work of freedom still calls us forward.
And we're getting superb cooperation.
You're all right now.
A world in which brutality and lawlessness are allowed to go unchecked isn't the kind of world we're going to want to live in."
Many worry about your reaction to one part or another.
I thank the Members of this Congress—support here for our troops in battle was overwhelming.
We passed a crime bill that made a useful start in fighting crime and drugs.
And I will complete it.
A government that remembers that the people are its master is a good and needed thing.
There are millions of young Americans in their 20's who barely remember the days of gas lines and unemployment lines.
The mothers of the Jewish ghettos of the east would pour honey on a book so the children would learn that learning is sweet.
And something else: to curb the proliferation of chemical, biological, ballistic missile and, above all, nuclear technologies.
To one brave girl in particular, they will mean the world.
The security and stability of the Persian Gulf must be assured.
